Out of the Aeons

  by H. P. Lovecraft & Hazel Heald

                                  Written 1933

   (Ms. found among the effects of the late Richard H. Johnson, Ph.D.,
   curator of the Cabot Museum of Archaeology, Boston, Mass.)

   It is not likely that anyone in Boston - or any alert reader elsewhere -
   will ever forget the strange affair of the Cabot Museum. The newspaper
   publicity given to that hellish mummy, the antique and terrible rumours
   vaguely linked with it, the morbid wave of interest and cult activities
   during 1932, and the frightful fate of the two intruders on December 1st
   of that year, all combined to form one of those classic mysteries which go
   down for generations as folklore and become the nuclei of whole cycles of
   horrific speculation.

   Everyone seems to realise, too, that something very vital and unutterably
   hideous was suppressed in the public accounts of the culminant horrors.
   Those first disquieting hints as to the condition of one of the two bodies
   were dismissed and ignored too abruptly - nor were the singular
   modifications in the mummy given the following-up which their news value
   would normally prompt. It also struck people as queer that the mummy was
   never restored to its case. In these days of expert taxidermy the excuse
   that its disintegrating condition made exhibition impracticable seemed a
   peculiarly lame one.

   As curator of the museum I am in a position to reveal all the suppressed
   facts, but this I shall not do during my lifetime. There are things about
   the world and universe which it is better for the majority not to know,
   and I have not departed from the opinion in which all of us - museum
   staff, physicians, reporters, and police - concurred at the period of the
   horror itself. At the same time it seems proper that a matter of such
   overwhelming scientific and historic importance should not remain wholly
   unrecorded - hence this account which I have prepared for the benefit of
   serious students. I shall place it among various papers to be examined
   after my death, leaving its fate to the discretion of my executors.
   Certain threats and unusual events during the past weeks have led me to
   believe that my life - as well as that of other museum officials - is in
   some peril through the enmity of several widespread secret cults of
   Asiatics, Polynesians, and heterogeneous mystical devotees; hence it is
   possible that the work of the executors may not be long postponed.
   [Executor's note: Dr. Johnson died suddenly and rather mysteriously of
   heart-failure on April 22, 1933. Wentworth Moore, taxidermist of the
   museum, disappeared around the middle of the preceding month. On February
   18 of the same year Dr. William Minot, who superintended a dissection
   connected with the case, was stabbed in the back, dying the following
   day.]

   The real beginning of the horror, I suppose, was in 1879 - long before my
   term as curator - when the museum acquired that ghastly, inexplicable
   mummy from the Orient Shipping Company. Its very discovery was monstrous
   and menacing, for it came from a crypt of unknown origin and fabulous
   antiquity on a bit of land suddenly upheaved from the Pacific's floor.

   On May 11, 1878, Capt. Charles Weatherbee of the freighter Eridanus, bound
   from Wellington, New Zealand, to Valparaiso, Chile, had sighted a new
   island unmarked on any chart and evidently of volcanic origin. It
   projected quite boldly out of the sea in the form of a truncated cone. A
   landing-party under Capt. Weatherbee noted evidences of long submersion on
   the rugged slopes which they climbed, while at the summit there were signs
   of recent destruction, as by an earthquake. Among the scattered rubble
   were massive stones of manifestly artificial shaping, and a little
   examination disclosed the presence of some of that prehistoric Cyclopean
   masonry found on certain Pacific islands and forming a perpetual
   archaeological puzzle.

   Finally the sailors entered a massive stone crypt - judged to have been
   part of a much larger edifice, and to have originally lain far underground
   - in one corner of which the frightful mummy crouched. After a short
   period of virtual panic, caused partly by certain carvings on the walls,
   the men were induced to move the mummy to the ship, though it was only
   with fear and loathing that they touched it. Close to the body, as if once
   thrust into its clothes, was a cylinder of an unknown metal containing a
   roll of thin, bluish-white membrane of equally unknown nature, inscribed
   with peculiar characters in a greyish, indeterminable pigment. In the
   centre of the vast stone floor was a suggestion of a trap-door, but the
   party lacked apparatus sufficiently powerful to move it.

   The Cabot Museum, then newly established, saw the meagre reports of the
   discovery and at once took steps to acquire the mummy and the cylinder.
   Curator Pickman made a personal trip to Valparaiso and outfitted a
   schooner to search for the crypt where the thing had been found, though
   meeting with failure in this matter. At the recorded position of the
   island nothing but the sea's unbroken expanse could be discerned, and the
   seekers realised that the same seismic forces which had suddenly thrust
   the island up had carried it down again to the watery darkness where it
   had brooded for untold aeons. The secret of that immovable trap-door would
   never be solved. The mummy and the cylinder, however, remained - and the
   former was placed on exhibition early in November, 1879, in the museum's
   hall of mummies.

   The Cabot Museum of Archaeology, which specialises in such remnants of
   ancient and unknown civilisations as do not fall within the domain of art,
   is a small and scarcely famous institution, though one of high standing in
   scientific circles. It stands in the heart of Boston's exclusive Beacon
   Hill district - in Mt. Vernon Street, near Joy - housed in a former
   private mansion with an added wing in the rear, and was a source of pride
   to its austere neighbours until the recent terrible events brought it an
   undesirable notoriety. The hall of mummies on the western side of the
   original mansion (which was designed by Bulfinch and erected in 1819), on
   the second floor, is justly esteemed by historians and anthropologists as
   harbouring the greatest collection of its kind in America. Here may be
   found typical examples of Egyptian embalming from the earliest Sakkarah
   specimens to the last Coptic attempts of the eighth century; mummies of
   other cultures, including the prehistoric Indian specimens recently found
   in the Aleutian Islands; agonised Pompeian figures moulded in plaster from
   tragic hollows in the ruin choking ashes; naturally mummified bodies from
   mines and other excavations in all parts of the earth - some surprised by
   their terrible entombment in the grotesque postures caused by their last,
   tearing death-throes - everything, in short, which any collection of the
   sort could well be expected to contain. In 1879, of course, it was much
   less ample than it is now; yet even then it was remarkable. But that
   shocking thing from the primal Cyclopean crypt on an ephemeral sea-spawned
   island was always its chief attraction and most impenetrable mystery.

   The mummy was that of a medium-sized man of unknown race, and was cast in
   a peculiar crouching posture. The face, half shielded by claw-like hands,
   had its under jaw thrust far forward, while the shrivelled features bore
   an expression of fright so hideous that few spectators could view them
   unmoved. The eyes were closed, with lids clamped down tightly over
   eyeballs apparently bulging and prominent. Bits of hair and beard
   remained, and the colour of the whole was a sort of dull neutral grey. In
   texture the thing was half leathery and half stony, forming an insoluble
   enigma to those experts who sought to ascertain how it was embalmed. In
   places bits of its substance were eaten away by time and decay. Rags of
   some peculiar fabric, with suggestions of unknown designs, still clung to
   the object.

   Just what made it so infinitely horrible and repulsive one could hardly
   say. For one thing, there was a subtle, indefinable sense of limitless
   antiquity and utter alienage which affected one like a view from the brink
   of a monstrous abyss of unplumbed blackness - but mostly it was the
   expression of crazed fear on the puckered, prognathous, half-shielded
   face. Such a symbol of infinite, inhuman, cosmic fright could not help
   communicating the emotion to the beholder amidst a disquieting cloud of
   mystery and vain conjecture.

   Among the discriminating few who frequented the Cabot Museum this relic of
   an elder, forgotten world soon acquired an unholy fame, though the
   institution's seclusion and quiet policy prevented it from becoming a
   popular sensation of the "Cardiff Giant" sort. In the last century the art
   of vulgar ballyhoo had not invaded the field of scholarship to the extent
   it has now succeeded in doing. Naturally, savants of various kinds tried
   their best to classify the frightful object, though always without
   success. Theories of a bygone Pacific civilisation, of which the Easter
   Island images and the megalithic masonry of Ponape and Nan-Matol are
   conceivable vestiges, were freely circulated among students, and learned
   journals carried varied and often conflicting speculations on a possible
   former continent whose peaks survive as the myriad islands of Melanesia
   and Polynesia. The diversity in dates assigned to the hypothetical
   vanished culture - or continent - was at once bewildering and amusing; yet
   some surprisingly relevant allusions were found in certain myths of Tahiti
   and other islands.

   Meanwhile the strange cylinder and its baffling scroll of unknown
   hieroglyphs, carefully preserved in the museum library, received their due
   share of attention. No question could exist as to their association with
   the mummy; hence all realised that in the unravelling of their mystery the
   mystery of the shrivelled horror would in all probability be unravelled as
   well. The cylinder, about four inches long by seven-eighths of an inch in
   diameter, was of a queerly iridescent metal utterly defying chemical
   analysis and seemingly impervious to all reagents. It was tightly fitted
   with a cap of the same substance, and bore engraved figurings of an
   evidently decorative and possibly symbolic nature - conventional designs
   which seemed to follow a peculiarly alien, paradoxical, and doubtfully
   describable system of geometry.

   Not less mysterious was the scroll it contained - a neat roll of some
   thin, bluish-white, unanalysable membrane, coiled round a slim rod of
   metal like that of the cylinder, and unwinding to a length of some two
   feet. The large, bold hieroglyphs, extending in a narrow line down the
   centre of the scroll and penned or painted with a grey pigment defying
   analysts, resembled nothing known to linguists and palaeographers, and
   could not be deciphered despite the transmission of photographic copies to
   every living expert in the given field.

   It is true that a few scholars, unusually versed in the literature of
   occultism and magic, found vague resemblances between some of the
   hieroglyphs and certain primal symbols described or cited in two or three
   very ancient, obscure, and esoteric texts such as the Book of Eibon,
   reputed to descend from forgotten Hyperborea; the Pnakotic fragments,
   alleged to be pre-human; and the monstrous and forbidden Necronomicon of
   the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred. None of these resemblances, however, was
   beyond dispute; and because of the prevailing low estimation of occult
   studies, no effort was made to circulate copies of the hieroglyphs among
   mystical specialists. Had such circulation occurred at this early date,
   the later history of the case might have been very different; indeed, a
   glance at the hieroglyphs by any reader of von Junzt's horrible Nameless
   Cults would have established a linkage of unmistakable significance. At
   this period, however, the readers of that monstrous blasphemy were
   exceedingly few; copies having been incredibly scarce in the interval
   between the suppression of the original Dusseldorf edition (1839) and of
   the Bridewell translation (1845) and the publication of the expurgated
   reprint by the Golden Goblin Press in 1909. Practically speaking, no
   occultist or student of the primal past's esoteric lore had his attention
   called to the strange scroll until the recent outburst of sensational
   journalism which precipitated the horrible climax.

                                      II.

   Thus matters glided along for a half-century following the installation of
   the frightful mummy at the museum. The gruesome object had a local
   celebrity among cultivated Bostonians, but no more than that; while the
   very existence of the cylinder and scroll - after a decade of futile
   research - was virtually forgotten. So quiet and conservative was the
   Cabot Museum that no reporter or feature writer ever thought of invading
   its uneventful precincts for rabble-tickling material.

   The invasion of ballyhoo commenced in the spring of 1931, when a purchase
   of somewhat spectacular nature - that of the strange objects and
   inexplicably preserved bodies found in crypts beneath the almost vanished
   and evilly famous ruins of Chateau Faussesflammes, in Averoigne, France -
   brought the museum prominently into the news columns. True to its
   "hustling" policy, the Boston Pillar sent a Sunday feature writer to cover
   the incident and pad it with an exaggerated general account of the
   institution itself; and this young man - Stuart Reynolds by name - hit
   upon the nameless mummy as a potential sensation far surpassing the recent
   acquisitions nominally forming his chief assignment. A smattering of
   theosophical lore, and a fondness for the speculations of such writers as
   Colonel Churchward and Lewis Spence concerning lost continents and primal
   forgotten civilisations, made Reynolds especially alert toward any aeonian
   relic like the unknown mummy.

   At the museum the reporter made himself a nuisance through constant and
   not always intelligent questionings and endless demands for the movement
   of encased objects to permit photographs from unusual angles. In the
   basement library room he pored endlessly over the strange metal cylinder
   and its membraneous scroll, photographing them from every angle and
   securing pictures of every bit of the weird hieroglyphed text. He likewise
   asked to see all books with any bearing whatever on the subject of primal
   cultures and sunken continents - sitting for three hours taking notes, and
   leaving only in order to hasten to Cambridge for a sight (if permission
   were granted) of the abhorred and forbidden Necronomicon at the Widener
   Library.

   On April 5th the article appeared in the Sunday Pillar, smothered in
   photographs of mummy, cylinder, and hieroglyphed scroll, and couched in
   the peculiarly simpering, infantile style which the Pillar affects for the
   benefit of its vast and mentally immature clientele. Full of inaccuracies,
   exaggerations, and sensationalism, it was precisely the sort of thing to
   stir the brainless and fickle interest of the herd - and as a result the
   once quiet museum began to be swarmed with chattering and vacuously
   staring throngs such as its stately corridors had never known before.

   There were scholarly and intelligent visitors, too, despite the puerility
   of the article - the pictures had spoken for themselves - and many persons
   of mature attainments sometimes see the Pillar by accident. I recall one
   very strange character who appeared during November - a dark, turbaned,
   and bushily bearded man with a laboured, unnatural voice, curiously
   expressionless face, clumsy hands covered with absurd white mittens, who
   gave a squalid West End address and called himself "Swami Chandraputra".
   This fellow was unbelievably erudite in occult lore and seemed profoundly
   and solemnly moved by the resemblance of the hieroglyphs on the scroll to
   certain signs and symbols of a forgotten elder world about which he
   professed vast intuitive knowledge.

   By June, the fame of the mummy and scroll had leaked far beyond Boston,
   and the museum had inquiries and requests for photographs from occultists
   and students of arcana all over the world. This was not altogether
   pleasing to our staff, since we are a scientific institution without
   sympathy for fantastic dreamers; yet we answered all questions with
   civility. One result of these catechisms was a highly learned article in
   The Occult Review by the famous New Orleans mystic Etienne-Laurent de
   Marigny, in which was asserted the complete identity of some of the odd
   geometrical designs on the iridescent cylinder, and of several of the
   hieroglyphs on the membraneous scroll, with certain ideographs of horrible
   significance (transcribed from primal monoliths or from the secret rituals
   of hidden bands of esoteric students and devotees) reproduced in the
   hellish and suppressed Black Book or Nameless Cults of von Junzt.

   De Marigny recalled the frightful death of von Junzt in 1840, a year after
   the publication of his terrible volume at Dusseldorf, and commented on his
   blood-curdling and partly suspected sources of information. Above all, he
   emphasised the enormous relevance of the tales with which von Junzt linked
   most of the monstrous ideographs he had reproduced. That these tales, in
   which a cylinder and scroll were expressly mentioned, held a remarkable
   suggestion of relationship to the things at the museum, no one could deny;
   yet they were of such breath-taking extravagance - involving such
   unbelievable sweeps of time and such fantastic anomalies of a forgotten
   elder world - that one could much more easily admire than believe them.

   Admire them the public certainly did, for copying in the press was
   universal. Illustrated articles sprang up everywhere, telling or
   purporting to tell the legends in the Black Book, expatiating on the
   horror of the mummy, comparing the cylinder's designs and the scroll's
   hieroglyphs with the figures reproduced by von Junzt, and indulging in the
   wildest, most sensational, and most irrational theories and speculations.
   Attendance at the museum was trebled, and the widespread nature of the
   interest was attested by the plethora of mail on the subject - most of it
   inane and superfluous - received at the museum. Apparently the mummy and
   its origin formed - for imaginative people - a close rival to the
   depression as chief topic of 1931 and 1932. For my own part, the principal
   effect of the furore was to make me read von Junzt's monstrous volume in
   the Golden Goblin edition - a perusal which left me dizzy and nauseated,
   yet thankful that I had not seen the utter infamy of the unexpurgated
   text.

                                      III.

   The archaic whispers reflected in the Black Book, and linked with designs
   and symbols so closely akin to what the mysterious scroll and cylinder
   bore, were indeed of a character to hold one spellbound and not a little
   awestruck. Leaping an incredible gulf of time - behind all the
   civilisations, races, and lands we know - they clustered round a vanished
   nation and a vanished continent of the misty, fabulous dawn-years . . .
   that to which legend has given the name of Mu, and which old tablets in
   the primal Naacal tongue speak of as flourishing 200,000 years ago, when
   Europe harboured only hybrid entities, and lost Hyperborea knew the
   nameless worship of black amorphous Tsathoggua.

   There was mention of a kingdom or province called K'naa in a very ancient
   land where the first human people had found monstrous ruins left by those
   who had dwelt there before - vague waves of unknown entities which had
   filtered down from the stars and lived out their aeons on a forgotten,
   nascent world. K'naa was a sacred place, since from its midst the bleak
   basalt cliffs of Mount Yaddith-Gho soared starkly into the sky, topped by
   a gigantic fortress of Cyclopean stone, infinitely older than mankind and
   built by the alien spawn of the dark planet Yuggoth, which had colonised
   the earth before the birth of terrestrial life.

   The spawn of Yuggoth had perished aeons before, but had left behind them
   one monstrous and terrible living thing which could never die - their
   hellish god or patron daemon Ghatanothoa, which glowered and brooded
   eternally though unseen in the crypts beneath that fortress on
   Yaddith-Gho. No human creature had ever climbed Yaddith-Gho or seen that
   blasphemous fortress except as a distant and geometrically abnormal
   outline against the sky; yet most agreed that Ghatanothoa was still there,
   wallowing and burrowing in unsuspected abysses beneath the megalithic
   walls. There were always those who believed that sacrifices must be made
   to Ghatanothoa, lest it crawl out of its hidden abysses and waddle
   horribly through the world of men as it had once waddled through the
   primal world of the Yuggoth-spawn.

   People said that if no victims were offered, Ghatanothoa would ooze up to
   the light of day and lumber down the basalt cliffs of Yaddith-Gho bringing
   doom to all it might encounter. For no living thing could behold
   Ghatanothoa, or even a perfect graven image of Ghatanothoa, however small,
   without suffering a change more horrible than death itself. Sight of the
   god, or its image, as all the legends of the Yuggoth-spawn agreed, meant
   paralysis and petrifaction of a singularly shocking sort, in which the
   victim was turned to stone and leather on the outside, while the brain
   within remained perpetually alive - horribly fixed and prisoned through
   the ages, and maddeningly conscious of the passage of interminable epochs
   of helpless inaction till chance and time might complete the decay of the
   petrified shell and leave it exposed to die. Most brains, of course, would
   go mad long before this aeon-deferred release could arrive. No human eyes,
   it was said, had ever glimpsed Ghatanothoa, though the danger was as great
   now as it had been for the Yuggoth-spawn.

   And so there was a cult in K'naa which worshipped Ghatanothoa and each
   year sacrificed to it twelve young warriors and twelve young maidens.
   These victims were offered up on flaming altars in the marble temple near
   the mountain's base, for none dared climb Yaddith-Gho's basalt cliffs or
   draw near to the Cyclopean prehuman stronghold on its crest. Vast was the
   power of the priests of Ghatanothoa, since upon them alone depended the
   preservation of K'naa and of all the land of Mu from the petrifying
   emergence of Ghatanothoa out of its unknown burrows.

   There were in the land an hundred priests of the Dark God, under Imash-Mo
   the High-Priest, who walked before King Thabon at the Nath-feast, and
   stood proudly whilst the King knelt at the Dhoric shrine. Each priest had
   a marble house, a chest of gold, two hundred slaves, and an hundred
   concubines, besides immunity from civil law and the power of life and
   death over all in K'naa save the priests of the King. Yet in spite of
   these defenders there was ever a fear in the land lest Ghatanothoa slither
   up from the depths and lurch viciously down the mountain to bring horror
   and petrification to mankind. In the latter years the priests forbade men
   even to guess or imagine what its frightful aspect might be.

   It was in the Year of the Red Moon (estimated as B.C. 173,148 by von
   Junzt) that a human being first dared to breathe defiance against
   Ghatanothoa and its nameless menace. This bold heretic was T'yog,
   High-Priest of Shub-Niggurath and guardian of the copper temple of the
   Goat with a Thousand Young. T'yog had thought long on the powers of the
   various gods, and had had strange dreams and revelations touching the life
   of this and earlier worlds. In the end he felt sure that the gods friendly
   to man could be arrayed against the hostile gods, and believed that
   Shub-Niggurath, Nug, and Yeb, as well as Yig the Serpent-god, were ready
   to take sides with man against the tyranny and presumption of Ghatanothoa.

   Inspired by the Mother Goddess, T'yog wrote down a strange formula in the
   hieratic Naacal of his order, which he believed would keep the possessor
   immune from the Dark God's petrifying power. With this protection, he
   reflected, it might be possible for a bold man to climb the dreaded basalt
   cliffs and - first of all human beings - enter the Cyclopean fortress
   beneath which Ghatanothoa reputedly brooded. Face to face with the god,
   and with the power of Shub-Niggurath and her sons on his side, T'yog
   believed that he might be able to bring it to terms and at last deliver
   mankind from its brooding menace. With humanity freed through his efforts,
   there would be no limits to the honours he might claim. All the honours of
   the priests of Ghatanothoa would perforce be transferred to him; and even
   kingship or godhood might conceivably be within his reach.

   So T'yog wrote his protective formula on a scroll of pthagon membrane
   (according to von Junzt, the inner skin of the extinct ya-kith-lizard) and
   enclosed it in a carven cylinder of lagh metal - the metal brought by the
   Elder Ones from Yuggoth, and found in no mine of earth. This charm,
   carried in his robe, would make him proof against the menace of
   Ghatanothoa - it would even restore the Dark God's petrified victims if
   that monstrous entity should ever emerge and begin its devastations. Thus
   he proposed to go up the shunned and man-untrodden mountain, invade the
   alien-angled citadel of Cyclopean stone, and confront the shocking
   devil-entity in its lair. Of what would follow, he could not even guess;
   but the hope of being mankind's saviour lent strength to his will.

   He had, however, reckoned without the jealousy and self-interest of
   Ghatanothoa's pampered priests. No sooner did they hear of his plan than -
   fearful for their prestige and privilege in case the Daemon-God should be
   dethroned - they set up a frantic clamour against the so-called sacrilege,
   crying that no man might prevail against Ghatanothoa, and that any effort
   to seek it out would merely provoke it to a hellish onslaught against
   mankind which no spell or priestcraft could hope to avert. With those
   cries they hoped to turn the public mind against T'yog; yet such was the
   people's yearning for freedom from Ghatanothoa, and such their confidence
   in the skill and zeal of T'yog, that all the protestations came to naught.
   Even the King, usually a puppet of the priests, refused to forbid T'yog's
   daring pilgrimage.

   It was then that the priests of Ghatanothoa did by stealth what they could
   not do openly. One night Imash-Mo, the High-Priest, stole to T'yog in his
   temple chamber and took from his sleeping form the metal cylinder;
   silently drawing out the potent scroll and putting in its place another
   scroll of great similitude, yet varied enough to have no power against any
   god or daemon. When the cylinder was slipped back into the sleeper's cloak
   Imash-Mo was content, for he knew T'yog was little likely to study that
   cylinder's contents again. Thinking himself protected by the true scroll,
   the heretic would march up the forbidden mountain and into the Evil
   Presence - and Ghatanothoa, unchecked by any magic, would take care of the
   rest.

   It would no longer be needful for Ghatanothoa's priests to preach against
   the defiance. Let T'yog go his way and meet his doom. And secretly, the
   priests would always cherish the stolen scroll - the true and potent charm
   - handing it down from one High-Priest to another for use in any dim
   future when it might be needful to contravene the Devil-God's will. So the
   rest of the night Imash-Mo slept in great peace, with the true scroll in a
   new cylinder fashioned for its harbourage.

   It was dawn on the Day of the Sky-Flames (nomenclature undefined by von
   Junzt) that T'yog, amidst the prayers and chanting of the people and with
   King Thabon's blessing on his head, started up the dreaded mountain with a
   staff of tlath-wood in his right hand. Within his robe was the cylinder
   holding what he thought to be the true charm - for he had indeed failed to
   find out the imposture. Nor did he see any irony in the prayers which
   Imash-Mo and the other priests of Ghatanothoa intoned for his safety and
   success.

   All that morning the people stood and watched as T'yog's dwindling form
   struggled up the shunned basalt slope hitherto alien to men's footsteps,
   and many stayed watching long after he had vanished where a perilous ledge
   led round to the mountain's hidden side. That night a few sensitive
   dreamers thought they heard a faint tremor convulsing the hated peak;
   though most ridiculed them for the statement. Next day vast crowds watched
   the mountain and prayed, and wondered how soon T'yog would return. And so
   the next day, and the next. For weeks they hoped and waited, and then they
   wept. Nor did anyone ever see T'yog, who would have saved mankind from
   fears, again.

   Thereafter men shuddered at T'yog's presumption, and tried not to think of
   the punishment his impiety had met. And the priests of Ghatanothoa smiled
   to those who might resent the god's will or challenge its right to the
   sacrifices. In later years the ruse of Imash-Mo became known to the
   people; yet the knowledge availed not to change the general feeling that
   Ghatanothoa were better left alone. None ever dared to defy it again. And
   so the ages rolled on, and King succeeded King, and High-Priest succeeded
   High-Priest, and nations rose and decayed, and lands rose above the sea
   and returned into the sea. And with many millennia decay fell upon K'naa -
   till at last on a hideous day of storm and thunder, terrific rumbling, and
   mountain-high waves, all the land of Mu sank into the sea forever.

   Yet down the later aeons thin streams of ancient secrets trickled. In
   distant lands there met together grey-faced fugitives who had survived the
   sea-fiend's rage, and strange skies drank the smoke of altars reared to
   vanished gods and daemons. Though none knew to what bottomless deep the
   sacred peak and Cyclopean fortress of dreaded Ghatanothoa had sunk, there
   were still those who mumbled its name and offered to it nameless
   sacrifices lest it bubble up through leagues of ocean and shamble among
   men spreading horror and petrifaction.

   Around the scattered priests grew the rudiments of a dark and secret cult
   - secret because the people of the new lands had other gods and devils,
   and thought only evil of elder and alien ones - and within that cult many
   hideous things were done, and many strange objects cherished. It was
   whispered that a certain line of elusive priests still harboured the true
   charm against Ghatanothoa which Imash-Mo stole from the sleeping T'yog;
   though none remained who could read or understand the cryptic syllables,
   or who could even guess in what part of the world the lost K'naa, the
   dreaded peak of Yaddith-Gho, and the titan fortress of the Devil-God had
   lain.

   Though it flourished chiefly in those Pacific regions around which Mu
   itself had once stretched, there were rumours of the hidden and detested
   cult of Ghatanothoa in ill-fated Atlantis, and on the abhorred plateau of
   Leng. Von Junzt implied its presence in the fabled subterrene kingdom of
   K'n-yan, and gave clear evidence that it had penetrated Egypt, Chaldaea,
   Persia, China, the forgotten Semite empires of Africa, and Mexico and Peru
   in the New World. That it had a strong connexion with the witchcraft
   movement in Europe, against which the bulls of popes were vainly directed,
   he more than strongly hinted. The West, however, was never favourable to
   its growth; and public indignation - aroused by glimpses of hideous rites
   and nameless sacrifices - wholly stamped out many of its branches. In the
   end it became a hunted, doubly furtive underground affair - yet never
   could its nucleus be quite exterminated. It always survived somehow,
   chiefly in the Far East and on the Pacific Islands, where its teachings
   became merged into the esoteric lore of the Polynesian Areoi.

   Von Junzt gave subtle and disquieting hints of actual contact with the
   cult; so that as I read I shuddered at what was rumoured about his death.
   He spoke of the growth of certain ideas regarding the appearance of the
   Devil-God - a creature which no human being (unless it were the too-daring
   T'yog, who had never returned) had ever seen - and contrasted this habit
   of speculation with the taboo prevailing in ancient Mu against any attempt
   to imagine what the horror looked like. There was a peculiar fearfulness
   about the devotees' awed and fascinated whispers on this subject -
   whispers heavy with morbid curiosity concerning the precise nature of what
   T'yog might have confronted in that frightful pre-human edifice on the
   dreaded and now-sunken mountains before the end (if it was an end) finally
   came - and I felt oddly disturbed by the German scholar's oblique and
   insidious references to this topic.

   Scarcely less disturbing were von Junzt's conjectures on the whereabouts
   of the stolen scroll of cantrips against Ghatanothoa, and on the ultimate
   uses to which this scroll might be put. Despite all my assurance that the
   whole matter was purely mythical, I could not help shivering at the notion
   of a latter-day emergence of the monstrous god, and at the picture of an
   humanity turned suddenly to a race of abnormal statues, each encasing a
   living brain doomed to inert and helpless consciousness for untold aeons
   of futurity. The old Dusseldorf savant had a poisonous way of suggesting
   more than he stated, and I could understand why his damnable book was
   suppressed in so many countries as blasphemous, dangerous, and unclean.

   I writhed with repulsion, yet the thing exerted an unholy fascination; and
   I could not lay it down till I had finished it. The alleged reproductions
   of designs and ideographs from Mu were marvellously and startlingly like
   the markings on the strange cylinder and the characters on the scroll, and
   the whole account teemed with details having vague, irritating suggestions
   of resemblance to things connected with the hideous mummy. The cylinder
   and scroll - the Pacific setting - the persistent notion of old Capt.
   Weatherbee that the Cyclopean crypt where the mummy was found had once
   lain under a vast building . . . somehow I was vaguely glad that the
   volcanic island had sunk before that massive suggestion of a trapdoor
   could be opened.

                                      IV.

   What I read in the Black Book formed a fiendishly apt preparation for the
   news items and closer events which began to force themselves upon me in
   the spring of 1932. I can scarcely recall just when the increasingly
   frequent reports of police action against the odd and fantastical
   religious cults in the Orient and elsewhere commenced to impress me; but
   by May or June I realised that there was, all over the world, a surprising
   and unwonted burst of activity on the part of bizarre, furtive, and
   esoteric mystical organisations ordinarily quiescent and seldom heard
   from.

   It is not likely that I would have connected these reports with either the
   hints of von Junzt or the popular furore over the mummy and cylinder in
   the museum, but for certain significant syllables and persistent
   resemblances - sensationally dwelt upon by the press - in the rites and
   speeches of the various secret celebrants brought to public attention. As
   it was, I could not help remarking with disquiet the frequent recurrence
   of a name - in various corrupt forms - which seemed to constitute a focal
   point of all the cult worship, and which was obviously regarded with a
   singular mixture of reverence and terror. Some of the forms quoted were
   G'tanta, Tanotah, Than-Tha, Gatan, and Ktan-Tah - and it did not require
   the suggestions of my now numerous occultist correspondents to make me see
   in these variants a hideous and suggestive kinship to the monstrous name
   rendered by von Junzt as Ghatanothoa.

   There were other disquieting features, too. Again and again the reports
   cited vague, awestruck references to a "true scroll" - something on which
   tremendous consequences seemed to hinge, and which was mentioned as being
   in the custody of a certain "Nagob", whoever and whatever he might be.
   Likewise, there was an insistent repetition of a name which sounded like
   Tog, Tiok, Yog, Zob, or Yob, and which my more and more excited
   consciousness involuntarily linked with the name of the hapless heretic
   T'yog as given in the Black Book. This name was usually uttered in
   connexion with such cryptical phrases as "It is none other than he", "He
   had looked upon its face", "He knows all, though he can neither see nor
   feel", "He has brought the memory down through the aeons", "The true
   scroll will release him", "Nagob has the true scroll", "He can tell where
   to find it".

   Something very queer was undoubtedly in the air, and I did not wonder when
   my occultist correspondents, as well as the sensational Sunday papers,
   began to connect the new abnormal stirrings with the legends of Mu on the
   one hand, and with the frightful mummy's recent exploitation on the other
   hand. The widespread articles in the first wave of press publicity, with
   their insistent linkage of the mummy, cylinder, and scroll with the tale
   in the Black Book, and their crazily fantastic speculations about the
   whole matter, might very well have roused the latent fanaticism in
   hundreds of those furtive groups of exotic devotees with which our complex
   world abounds. Nor did the papers cease adding fuel to the flames - for
   the stories on the cult-stirrings were even wilder than the earlier series
   of yarns.

   As the summer drew on, attendants noticed a curious new element among the
   throngs of visitors which - after a lull following the first burst of
   publicity - were again drawn to the museum by the second furore. More and
   more frequently there were persons of strange and exotic aspect - swarthy
   Asiatics, long-haired nondescripts, and bearded brown men who seemed
   unused to European clothes - who would invariably inquire for the hall of
   mummies and would subsequently be found staring at the hideous Pacific
   specimen in a veritable ecstasy of fascination. Some quiet, sinister
   undercurrent in this flood of eccentric foreigners seemed to impress all
   the guards, and I myself was far from undisturbed. I could not help
   thinking of the prevailing cult-stirrings among just such exotics as these
   - and the connexion of those stirrings with myths all too close to the
   frightful mummy and its cylinder scroll.

   At times I was half tempted to withdraw the mummy from exhibition -
   especially when an attendant told me that he had several times glimpsed
   strangers making odd obeisances before it, and had overheard sing-song
   mutterings which sounded like chants or rituals addressed to it at hours
   when the visiting throngs were somewhat thinned. One of the guards
   acquired a queer nervous hallucination about the petrified horror in the
   lone glass case, alleging that he could see from day to day certain vague,
   subtle, and infinitely slight changes in the frantic flexion of the bony
   claws, and in the fear-crazed expression of the leathery face. He could
   not get rid of the loathsome idea that those horrible, bulging eyes were
   about to pop suddenly open.

   It was early in September, when the curious crowds had lessened and the
   hall of mummies was sometimes vacant, that the attempt to get at the mummy
   by cutting the glass of its case was made. The culprit, a swarthy
   Polynesian, was spied in time by a guard, and was overpowered before any
   damage occurred. Upon investigation the fellow turned out to be an
   Hawaiian notorious for his activity in certain underground religious
   cults, and having a considerable police record in connexion with abnormal
   and inhuman rites and sacrifices. Some of the papers found in his room
   were highly puzzling and disturbing, including many sheets covered with
   hieroglyphs closely resembling those on the scroll at the museum and in
   the Black Book of von Junzt; but regarding these things he could not be
   prevailed upon to speak.

   Scarcely a week after this incident, another attempt to get at the mummy -
   this time by tampering with the lock of his case - resulted in a second
   arrest. The offender, a Cingalese, had as long and unsavoury a record of
   loathsome cult activities as the Hawaiian had possessed, and displayed a
   kindred unwillingness to talk to the police. What made this case doubly
   and darkly interesting was that a guard had noticed this man several times
   before, and had heard him addressing to the mummy a peculiar chant
   containing unmistakable repetitions of the word "T'yog". As a result of
   this affair I doubled the guards in the hall of mummies, and ordered them
   never to leave the now notorious specimen out of sight, even for a moment.

   As may well be imagined, the press made much of these two incidents,
   reviewing its talk of primal and fabulous Mu, and claiming boldly that the
   hideous mummy was none other than the daring heretic T'yog, petrified by
   something he had seen in the pre-human citadel he had invaded, and
   preserved intact through 175,000 years of our planet's turbulent history.
   That the strange devotees represented cults descended from Mu, and that
   they were worshipping the mummy - or perhaps even seeking to awaken it to
   life by spells and incantations - was emphasised and reiterated in the
   most sensational fashion.

   Writers exploited the insistence of the old legends that the brain of
   Ghatanothoa's petrified victims remained conscious and unaffected - a
   point which served as a basis for the wildest and most improbable
   speculations. The mention of a "true scroll" also received due attention -
   it being the prevailing popular theory that T'yog's stolen charm against
   Ghatanothoa was somewhere in existence, and that cult-members were trying
   to bring it into contact with T'yog himself for some purpose of their own.
   One result of this exploitation was that a third wave of gaping visitors
   began flooding the museum and staring at the hellish mummy which served as
   a nucleus for the whole strange and disturbing affair.

   It was among this wave of spectators - many of whom made repeated visits -
   that talk of the mummy's vaguely changing aspect first began to be
   widespread. I suppose - despite the disturbing notion of the nervous guard
   some months before - that the museum's personnel was too well used to the
   constant sight of odd shapes to pay close attention to details; in any
   case, it was the excited whispers of visitors which at length aroused the
   guards to the subtle mutation which was apparently in progress. Almost
   simultaneously the press got hold of it - with blatant results which can
   well be imagined.

   Naturally, I gave the matter my most careful observation, and by the
   middle of October decided that a definite disintegration of the mummy was
   under way. Through some chemical or physical influence in the air, the
   half-stony, half-leathery fibres seemed to be gradually relaxing, causing
   distinct variations in the angles of the limbs and in certain details of
   the fear-twisted facial expression. After a half-century of perfect
   preservation this was a highly disconcerting development, and I had the
   museum's taxidermist, Dr. Moore, go carefully over the gruesome object
   several times. He reported a general relaxation and softening, and gave
   the thing two or three astringent sprayings, but did not dare to attempt
   anything drastic lest there be a sudden crumbling and accelerated decay.

   The effect of all this upon the gaping crowds was curious. Heretofore each
   new sensation sprung by the press had brought fresh waves of staring and
   whispering visitors, but now - though the papers blathered endlessly about
   the mummy's changes - the public seemed to have acquired a definite sense
   of fear which outranked even its morbid curiosity. People seemed to feel
   that a sinister aura hovered over the museum, and from a high peak the
   attendance fell to a level distinctly below normal. This lessened
   attendance gave added prominence to the stream of freakish foreigners who
   continued to infest the place, and whose numbers seemed in no way
   diminished.

   On November 18th a Peruvian of Indian blood suffered a strange hysterical
   or epileptic seizure in front of the mummy, afterward shrieking from his
   hospital cot, "It tried to open its eyes! - T'yog tried to open his eyes
   and stare at me!" I was by this time on the point of removing the object
   from exhibition, but permitted myself to be overruled at a meeting of our
   very conservative directors. However, I could see that the museum was
   beginning to acquire an unholy reputation in its austere and quiet
   neighbourhood. After this incident I gave instructions that no one be
   allowed to pause before the monstrous Pacific relic for more than a few
   minutes at a time.

   It was on November 24th, after the museum's five o'clock closing, that one
   of the guards noticed a minute opening of the mummy's eyes. The phenomenon
   was very slight - nothing but a thin crescent of cornea being visible in
   either eye - but it was none the less of the highest interest. Dr. Moore,
   having been summoned hastily, was about to study the exposed bits of
   eyeball with a magnifier when his handling of the mummy caused the
   leathery lids to fall tightly shut again. All gentle efforts to open them
   failed, and the taxidermist did not dare to apply drastic measures. When
   he notified me of all this by telephone I felt a sense of mounting dread
   hard to reconcile with the apparently simple event concerned. For a moment
   I could share the popular impression that some evil, amorphous blight from
   unplumbed deeps of time and space hung murkily and menacingly over the
   museum.

   Two nights later a sullen Filipino was trying to secrete himself in the
   museum at closing time. Arrested and taken to the station, he refused even
   to give his name, and was detained as a suspicious person. Meanwhile the
   strict surveillance of the mummy seemed to discourage the odd hordes of
   foreigners from haunting it. At least, the number of exotic visitors
   distinctly fell off after the enforcement of the "move along" order.

   It was during the early morning hours of Thursday, December 1st, that a
   terrible climax developed. At about one o'clock horrible screams of mortal
   fright and agony were heard issuing from the museum, and a series of
   frantic telephone calls from neighbours brought to the scene quickly and
   simultaneously a squad of police and several museum officials, including
   myself. Some of the policemen surrounded the building while others, with
   the officials, cautiously entered. In the main corridor we found the night
   watchman strangled to death - a bit of East Indian hemp still knotted
   around his neck - and realised that despite all precautions some darkly
   evil intruder or intruders had gained access to the place. Now, however, a
   tomb-like silence enfolded everything and we almost feared to advance
   upstairs to the fateful wing where we knew the core of the trouble must
   lurk. We felt a bit more steadied after flooding the building with light
   from the central switches in the corridor, and finally crept reluctantly
   up the curving staircase and through a lofty archway to the hall of
   mummies.

                                       V.

   It is from this point onward that reports of the hideous case have been
   censored - for we have all agreed that no good can be accomplished by a
   public knowledge of those terrestrial conditions implied by the further
   developments. I have said that we flooded the whole building with light
   before our ascent. Now beneath the beams that beat down on the glistening
   cases and their gruesome contents, we saw outspread a mute horror whose
   baffling details testified to happenings utterly beyond our comprehension.
   There were two intruders - who we afterward agreed must have hidden in the
   building before closing time - but they would never be executed for the
   watchman's murder. They had already paid the penalty.

   One was a Burmese and the other a Fiji-Islander - both known to the police
   for their share in frightful and repulsive cult activities. They were
   dead, and the more we examined them the more utterly monstrous and
   unnamable we felt their manner of death to be. On both faces was a more
   wholly frantic and inhuman look of fright than even the oldest policeman
   had ever seen before; yet in the state of the two bodies there were vast
   and significant differences.

   The Burmese lay collapsed close to the nameless mummy's case, from which a
   square of glass had been neatly cut. In his right hand was a scroll of
   bluish membrane which I at once saw was covered with greyish hieroglyphs -
   almost a duplicate of the scroll in the strange cylinder in the library
   downstairs, though later study brought out subtle differences. There was
   no mark of violence on the body, and in view of the desperate, agonised
   expression on the twisted face we could only conclude that the man died of
   sheer fright.

   It was the closely adjacent Fijian, though, that gave us the profoundest
   shock. One of the policemen was the first to feel of him, and the cry of
   fright he emitted added another shudder to that neighbourhood's night of
   terror. We ought to have known from the lethal greyness of the once-black,
   fear-twisted face, and of the bony hands - one of which still clutched an
   electric torch - that something was hideously wrong; yet every one of us
   was unprepared for what that officer's hesitant touch disclosed. Even now
   I can think of it only with a paroxysm of dread and repulsion. To be brief
   - the hapless invader, who less than an hour before had been a sturdy
   living Melanesian bent on unknown evils, was now a rigid, ash-grey figure
   of stony, leathery petrification, in every respect identical with the
   crouching, aeon-old blasphemy in the violated glass case.

   Yet that was not the worst. Crowning all other horrors, and indeed seizing
   our shocked attention before we turned to the bodies on the floor, was the
   state of the frightful mummy. No longer could its changes be called vague
   and subtle, for it had now made radical shifts of posture. It had sagged
   and slumped with a curious loss of rigidity; its bony claws had sunk until
   they no longer even partly covered its leathery, fear-crazed face; and -
   God help us! - its hellish bulging eyes had popped wide open, and seemed
   to be staring directly at the two intruders who had died of fright or
   worse.

   That ghastly, dead-fish stare was hideously mesmerising, and it haunted us
   all the time we were examining the bodies of the invaders. Its effect on
   our nerves was damnably queer, for we somehow felt a curious rigidity
   creeping over us and hampering our simplest motions - a rigidity which
   later vanished very oddly when we passed the hieroglyphed scroll around
   for inspection. Every now and then I felt my gaze drawn irresistibly
   toward those horrible bulging eyes in the case, and when I returned to
   study them after viewing the bodies I thought I detected something very
   singular about the glassy surface of the dark and marvellously
   well-preserved pupils. The more I looked, the more fascinated I became;
   and at last I went down to the office - despite that strange stiffness in
   my limbs - and brought up a strong multiple magnifying glass. With this I
   commenced a very close and careful survey of the fishy pupils, while the
   others crowded expectantly around.

   I had always been rather sceptical of the theory that scenes and objects
   become photographed on the retina of the eye in cases of death or coma;
   yet no sooner did I look through the lens than I realised the presence of
   some sort of image other than the room's reflection in the glassy, bulging
   optics of this nameless spawn of the aeons. Certainly, there was a dimly
   outlined scene on the age-old retinal surface, and I could not doubt that
   it formed the last thing on which those eyes had looked in life -
   countless millennia ago. It seemed to be steadily fading, and I fumbled
   with the magnifier in order to shift another lens into place. Yet it must
   have been accurate and clear-cut; even if infinitesimally small, when - in
   response to some evil spell or act connected with their visit - it had
   confronted those intruders who were frightened to death. With the extra
   lens I could make out many details formerly invisible, and the awed group
   around me hung on the flood of words with which I tried to tell what I
   saw.

   For here, in the year 1932, a man in the city of Boston was looking on
   something which belonged to an unknown and utterly alien world - a world
   that vanished from existence and normal memory aeons ago. There was a vast
   room - a chamber of Cyclopean masonry - and I seemed to be viewing it from
   one of its corners. On the walls were carvings so hideous that even in
   this imperfect image their stark blasphemousness and bestiality sickened
   me. I could not believe that the carvers of these things were human, or
   that they had ever seen human beings when they shaped the frightful
   outlines which leered at the beholder. In the centre of the chamber was a
   colossal trap-door of stone, pushed upward to permit the emergence of some
   object from below. The object should have been clearly visible - indeed,
   must have been when the eyes first opened before the fear-stricken
   intruders - though under my lenses it was merely a monstrous blur.

   As it happened, I was studying the right eye only when I brought the extra
   magnification into play. A moment later I wished fervently that my search
   had ended there. As it was, however, the zeal of discovery and revelation
   was upon me, and I shifted my powerful lenses to the mummy's left eye in
   the hope of finding the image less faded on that retina. My hands,
   trembling with excitement and unnaturally stiff from some obscure
   influence, were slow in bringing the magnifier into focus, but a moment
   later I realised that the image was less faded than in the other eye. I
   saw in a morbid flash of half-distinctness the insufferable thing which
   was welling up through the prodigious trap-door in that Cyclopean,
   immemorially archaic crypt of a lost world - and fell fainting with an
   inarticulate shriek of which I am not even ashamed.

   By the time I revived there was no distinct image of anything in either
   eye of the monstrous mummy. Sergeant Keefe of the police looked with my
   glass, for I could not bring myself to face that abnormal entity again.
   And I thanked all the powers of the cosmos that I had not looked earlier
   than I did. It took all my resolution, and a great deal of solicitation,
   to make me relate what I had glimpsed in the hideous moment of revelation.
   Indeed, I could not speak till we had all adjourned to the office below,
   out of sight of that daemoniac thing which could not be. For I had begun
   to harbour the most terrible and fantastic notions about the mummy and its
   glassy, bulging eyes - that it had a kind of hellish consciousness, seeing
   all that occurred before it and trying vainly to communicate some
   frightful message from the gulfs of time. That meant madness - but at last
   I thought I might be better off if I told what I had half seen.

   After all, it was not a long thing to tell. Oozing and surging up out of
   that yawning trap-door in the Cyclopean crypt I had glimpsed such an
   unbelievable behemothic monstrosity that I could not doubt the power of
   its original to kill with its mere sight. Even now I cannot begin to
   suggest it with any words at my command. I might call it gigantic -
   tentacled - proboscidian - octopus-eyed - semi-amorphous - plastic -
   partly squamous and partly rugose - ugh! But nothing I could say could
   even adumbrate the loathsome, unholy, non-human, extra-galactic horror and
   hatefulness and unutterable evil of that forbidden spawn of black chaos
   and illimitable night. As I write these words the associated mental image
   causes me to lean back faint and nauseated. As I told of the sight to the
   men around me in the office, I had to fight to preserve the consciousness
   I had regained.

   Nor were my hearers much less moved. Not a man spoke above a whisper for a
   full quarter-hour, and there were awed, half-furtive references to the
   frightful lore in the Black Book, to the recent newspaper tales of
   cult-stirrings, and to the sinister events in the museum. Ghatanothoa . .
   . Even its smallest perfect image could petrify - T'yog - the false scroll
   - he never came back - the true scroll which could fully or partly undo
   the petrification - did it survive? - the hellish cults - the phrases
   overheard - "It is none other than he" - "He had looked upon its face" -
   "He knows all, though he can neither see nor feel" - "He had brought the
   memory down through the aeons" - "The true scroll will release him" -
   "Nagob has the true scroll" - "He can tell where to find it." Only the
   healing greyness of the dawn brought us back to sanity; a sanity which
   made of that glimpse of mine a closed topic - something not to be
   explained or thought of again.

   We gave out only partial reports to the press, and later on cooperated
   with the papers in making other suppressions. For example, when the
   autopsy shewed the brain and several other internal organs of the
   petrified Fijian to be fresh and unpetrified, though hermetically sealed
   by the petrification of the exterior flesh - an anomaly about which
   physicians are still guardedly and bewilderedly debating - we did not wish
   a furore to be started. We knew too well what the yellow journals,
   remembering what was said of the intact-brained and still-conscious state
   of Ghatanothoa's stony-leathery victims, would make of this detail.

   As matters stood, they pointed out that the man who had held the
   hieroglyphed scroll - and who had evidently thrust it at the mummy through
   the opening in the case - was not petrified, while the man who had not
   held it was. When they demanded that we make certain experiments -
   applying the scroll both to the stony-leathery body of the Fijian and to
   the mummy itself - we indignantly refused to abet such superstitious
   notions. Of course, the mummy was withdrawn from public view and
   transferred to the museum laboratory awaiting a really scientific
   examination before some suitable medical authority. Remembering past
   events, we kept it under a strict guard; but even so, an attempt was made
   to enter the museum at 2:25 a.m. on December 5th. Prompt working of the
   burglar alarm frustrated the design, though unfortunately the criminal or
   criminals escaped.

   That no hint of anything further ever reached the public, I am profoundly
   thankful. I wish devoutly that there were nothing more to tell. There
   will, of course, be leaks, and if anything happens to me I do not know
   what my executors will do with this manuscript; but at least the case will
   not be painfully fresh in the multitude's memory when the revelation
   comes. Besides, no one will believe the facts when they are finally told.
   That is the curious thing about the multitude. When their yellow press
   makes hints, they are ready to swallow anything; but when a stupendous and
   abnormal revelation is actually made, they laugh it aside as a lie. For
   the sake of general sanity it is probably better so.

   I have said that a scientific examination of the frightful mummy was
   planned. This took place on December 8th, exactly a week after the hideous
   culmination of events, and was conducted by the eminent Dr. William Minot,
   in conjunction with Wentworth Moore, Sc.D., taxidermist of the museum. Dr.
   Minot had witnessed the autopsy of the oddly petrified Fijian the week
   before. There were also present Messrs. Lawrence Cabot and Dudley
   Saltonstall of the museum's trustees, Drs. Mason, Wells, and Carver of the
   museum staff, two representatives of the press, and myself. During the
   week the condition of the hideous specimen had not visibly changed, though
   some relaxation of its fibres caused the position of the glassy, open eyes
   to shift slightly from time to time. All of the staff dreaded to look at
   the thing - for its suggestion of quiet, conscious watching had become
   intolerable - and it was only with an effort that I could bring myself to
   attend the examination.

   Dr. Minot arrived shortly after 1:00 p.m., and within a few minutes began
   his survey of the mummy. Considerable disintegration took place under his
   hands, and in view of this - and of what we told him concerning the
   gradual relaxation of the specimen since the first of October - he decided
   that a thorough dissection ought to be made before the substance was
   further impaired. The proper instruments being present in the laboratory
   equipment, he began at once; exclaiming aloud at the odd, fibrous nature
   of the grey, mummified substance.

   But his exclamation was still louder when he made the first deep incision,
   for out of that cut there slowly trickled a thick crimson stream whose
   nature - despite the infinite ages dividing this hellish mummy's lifetime
   from the present - was utterly unmistakable. A few more deft strokes
   revealed various organs in astonishing degrees of non-petrified
   preservation - all, indeed, being intact except where injuries to the
   petrified exterior had brought about malformation or destruction. The
   resemblance of this condition to that found in the fright-killed
   Fiji-Islander was so strong that the eminent physician gasped in
   bewilderment. The perfection of those ghastly bulging eyes was uncanny,
   and their exact state with respect to petrification was very difficult to
   determine.

   At 3:30 p.m. the brain-case was opened - and ten minutes later our stunned
   group took an oath of secrecy which only such guarded documents as this
   manuscript will ever modify. Even the two reporters were glad to confirm
   the silence. For the opening had revealed a pulsing, living brain.

   The Lovecraft Library wishes to extend its gratitude to Pytheon for
   transcribing this text. 
