The Battle That Ended the Century
(MS. Found in a Time Machine)

  by H. P. Lovecraft and Robert Barlow

                [Note: Barlow's contributions are in brackets.]

   On the eve of the year 2001 a vast crowd of interested spectators were
   present amidst the romantic ruins of Cohen's Garage, on the former site of
   New York, to witness a fistic encounter between two renowned champions of
   the strange-story firmament -- Two-Gun Bob, the Terror of the Plains, and
   Knockout Bernie, the Wild Wolf of West Shokan. [The Wolf was fresh from
   his correspondence course in physical training, sold to him by Mr. Arthur
   Leeds.] Before the battle the auguries were determined by the venerated
   Thibetan Lama Bill Lum Li, who evoked the primal serpent-god of Valusia
   and found unmistakable signs of victory for both sides. Cream-puffs were
   inattentively vended by Wladislaw Brenryk -- the partakers being treated
   by the official surgeons, Drs. D. H. Killer and M. Gin Brewery.

   The gong was sounded at 39 o'clock, after which the air grew red with the
   gore of battle, lavishly flung about by the mighty Texas slaughterer. Very
   shortly the first actual damage occurred -- the loosening of several teeth
   in both participants. One, bouncing out from the Wolf's mouth after a
   casual tap from Two-Gun, described a parabola toward Yucatan; being
   retrieved in a hasty expedition by Messrs. A. Hijacked Barrell and G. A.
   Scotland. This incident was used by the eminent sociologist and ex-poet
   Frank Chimesleep Short, Jr., as the basis of a ballad of proletarian
   propaganda with three intentionally defective lines. Meanwhile a potentate
   from a neighbouring kingdom, the Effjay of Akkamin (also known to himself
   as an amateur critic), expressed his frenzied disgust at the technique of
   the combatants, at the same time peddling photographs of the fighters
   (with himself in the foreground) at five cents each.

   In round two the Shokan Soaker's sturdy right crashed through the Texan's
   ribs and became entangled in sundry viscera; thereby enabling Two Gun to
   get in several telling blows on his opponent's unprotected chin. Bob was
   greatly annoyed by the effeminate squeamishness shewn by several onlookers
   as muscles, glands, gore, and bits of flesh were spattered over the
   ringside. During this round the eminent magazine-cover anatomist Mrs. M.
   Blunderage portrayed the battlers as a pair of spirited nudes behind a
   thin veil of conveniently curling tobacco-smoke, while the late Mr. C.
   HalfCent provided a sketch of three Chinamen clad in silk hats and
   galoshes -- this being his own original conception of the affray. Among
   the amateur sketches made was one by Mr. Goofy Hooey, which later gained
   fame in the annual Cubist exhibit as "Abstraction of an Eradicated
   Pudding".

   In the third round the fight grew really rough; several ears and other
   appurtenances being wholly or partially detached from the frontier battler
   by the Shokan Shocker. Somewhat irritated, Two-Gun countered with some
   exceptionally sharp blows; severing many fragments from his aggressor, who
   continued to fight with all his remaining members. [At this stage the
   audience gave signs of much nervous excitement -- instances of trampling
   and goring being frequent. The more enthusiastic members were placed in
   the custody of Mr. Harry Brobst of the Butler Hospital for Mental
   Diseases.]

   The entire affair was reported by Mr. W. Lablache Talcum, his copy being
   revised by Horse Power Hateart. Throughout the event notes were taken by
   M. le Comte d'Erlette for a 200-volume novel-cycle in the Proustian
   manner, to be entitled Morning in September, with illustrations by Mrs.
   Blunderage. Mr. J. Caesar Warts frequently interviewed both battlers and
   all the more important spectators; obtaining as souvenirs (after a
   spirited struggle with the Effjay) an autographed quarter-rib of
   Two-Gun's, in an excellent state of preservation, and three finger-nails
   from the Wild Wolf. Lighting effects were supplied by the Electrical
   Testing Laboratories under the supervision of H. Kanebrake. The fourth
   round was prolonged eight hours at the request of the official artist, Mr.
   H. Wanderer, who wished to put certain shadings of fantasy into his
   representation of the Wolf's depleted physiognomy, which included several
   supernumerary details supplied by the imagination.

   The climax came in round five, when the Texas Tearer's left passed
   entirely through Battling Bernie's face and brought both sluggers to the
   mat. This was adjudged a finish by the referee -- Robertieff Essovitch
   Karovsky, the Muscovite Ambassador -- who, in view of the Shokan Shocker's
   gory state, declared the latter to be essentially liquidated according to
   the Marxian ideology. The Wild Wolf entered an official protest, which was
   promptly overruled on the ground that all the points necessary to
   technical death were theoretically present.

   The gonfalons sounded a fanfare of triumph for the victor, while the
   technically vanquished was committed to the care of the official
   mortician, Mr. Teaberry Quince. During the ceremonies the theoretical
   corpse strolled away for a bite of bologna, but a tasteful cenotaph was
   supplied to furnish a focus for the rites. The funeral procession was
   headed by a gaily bedecked hearse driven by Malik Taus, the Peacock
   Sultan, who sat on the box in West Point uniform and turban, and steered
   an expert course over several formidable hedges and stone walls. About
   half way to the cemetery the cortege was rejoined by the corpse, who sat
   beside Sultan Malik on the box and finished his bologna sandwich -- his
   ample girth having made it impossible to enter the hastily selected
   cenotaph. An appropriate dirge was rendered by Maestro Sing Lee Bawledout
   on the piccolo; Messrs. De Silva, Brown, and Henderson's celebrated aria,
   "Never Swat a Fly", from the old cantata Just Imagine, being chosen for
   the occasion. The only detail omitted from the funeral was the interment,
   which was interrupted by the disconcerting news that the official
   gate-taker -- the celebrated financier and publisher Ivar K. Rodent, Esq.
   -- had absconded with the entire proceeds. [This omission was regretted
   chiefly by the Rev. D. Vest Wind, who was thereby forced to leave unspoken
   a long and moving sermon revised expressly for the celebration from a
   former discourse delivered at the burial of a favourite horse.]

   Mr. Talcum's report of the event, illustrated by the well-known artist
   Klarkash-Ton (who esoterically depicted the fighters as boneless fungi),
   was printed after repeated rejections by the discriminating editor of the
   Windy City Grab-Bag -- as a broadside by W. Peter Chef[, with
   typographical supervision by Vrest Orton.]. This, through the efforts of
   Otis Adelbert Kline, was finally placed on sale in the bookshop of Smearum
   & Weep, three and a half copies finally being disposed of through the
   alluring catalogue description supplied by Samuelus Philanthropus, Esq.

   In response to this wide demand, the text was finally reprinted by Mr. De
   Merit in the polychromatic pages of Wurst's Weakly Americana under the
   title "Has Science Been Outmoded? or, The Millers in the Garage". No
   copies, however, remain in circulation; since all which were not snapped
   up by fanatical bibliophiles were seized by the police in connexion with
   the libel suit of the Wild Wolf, who was, after several appeals ending
   with the World Court, adjudged not only officially alive but the clear
   winner of the combat.

  Glossary of Names

   Two-Gun Bob -- Robert E. Howard
   Knockout Bernie, the Wild Wolf of West Shokan -- Bernard Austin Dwyer, of
   West Shokan, N.Y.
   Bill Lum Li -- William Lumley
   Wladislaw Brenryk -- H. Warner Munn
   D. H. Killer -- David H. Keller
   M. Gin Brewery -- Miles G. Breuer
   A. Hijacked Barrell -- A. Hyatt Verrill
   G. A. Scotland -- George Allan England
   Frank Chimesleep Short, Jr -- Frank Belknap Long, Jr.
   The Effjoy of Akkomin -- Forrest J. Ackerman
   Mrs. M. Blunderage -- Margaret Brundage (artist for Weird Tales)
   Mr. C. Half-Cent -- C. C. Senf (artist for Weird Tales)
   Mr. Goofy Hooey -- Hugh Rankin (artist for Weird Tales)
   W. Lablache Talcum -- Wilfred Blanch Talman
   Horse Power Hateart -- Howard Phillips Lovecraft
   M. le Comte d'Erlette -- August Derleth (author of Evening in Spring)
   J. Caesar Warts -- Julius Schwartz
   H. Kanebrake -- H. C. Koenig (employed by the Electrical Testing
   Laboratories)
   H. Wanderer -- Howard Wandrei
   Robertieff Essovitch Karovsky -- Robert S. Carr
   Teaberry Quince -- Seabury Quinn
   Malik Taus, the Peacock Sultan -- E. Hoffmann Price
   Sing Lee Bawledout -- F. Lee Baldwin
   Ivor K. Rodent -- Hugo Gernsback
   Rev. D. Vest Wind -- Unknown
   Klarkash-Ton -- Clark Ashton Smith
   Windy City Grab-Bag -- Weird Tales
   W. Peter Chef -- W. Paul Cook
   Smearum & Weep -- Dauber & Pine
   Samuelus Philanthropus -- Samuel Loveman
   Mr. De Merit -- A. Merritt (author of The Dwellers in the Mirage)
   Wurst's Weekly Americana -- Hearst's American Weekly

   The Lovecraft Library wishes to extend its gratitude to Jim Java for
   transcribing this text. 
