The Disinterment

  by H. P. Lovecraft & Duane W. Rimel

                                  Written 1935

   I awoke abruptly from a horrible dream and stared wildly about. Then,
   seeing the high, arched ceiling and the narrow stained windows of my
   friend's room, a flood of uneasy revelation coursed over me; and I knew
   that all of Andrews' hopes had been realized. I lay supine in a large bed,
   the posts of which reared upward in dizzy perspective; while on vast
   shelves about the chamber were the familiar books and antiques I was
   accustomed to seeing in that secluded corner of the crumbling and ancient
   mansion which had formed our joint home for many years. On a table by the
   wall stood a huge candelabrum of early workmanship and design, and the
   usual light window-curtains had been replaced by hangings of somber black,
   which took on a faint, ghostly luster in the dying light.

   I recalled forcibly the events preceding my confinement and seclusion in
   this veritable medieval fortress. They were not pleasant, and I shuddered
   anew when I remembered the couch that had held me before my tenancy of the
   present one - the couch that everyone supposed would be my last. Memory
   burned afresh regarding those hideous circumstances which had compelled me
   to choose between a true death and a hypothetical one - with a later
   re-animation by therapeutic methods known only to my comrade, Marshall
   Andrews. The whole thing had begun when I returned from the Orient a year
   before and discovered, to my utter horror, that I had contracted leprosy
   while abroad. I had known that I was taking grave chances in caring for my
   stricken brother in the Philippines, but no hint of my own affliction
   appeared until I returned to my native land. Andrews himself had made the
   discovery, and kept it from me as long as possible; but our close
   acquaintance soon disclosed the awful truth.

   At once I was quartered in our ancient abode atop the crags overlooking
   crumbling Hampden, from whose musty halls and quaint, arched doorways I
   was never permitted to go forth. It was a terrible existence, with the
   yellow shadow hanging constantly over me; yet my friend never faltered in
   his faith, taking care not to contract the dread scourge, but meanwhile
   making life as pleasant and comfortable as possible. His widespread though
   somewhat sinister fame as a surgeon prevented any authority from
   discovering my plight and shipping me away.

   It was after nearly a year of this seclusion - late in August - that
   Andrews decided on a trip to the West Indies - to study "native" medical
   methods, he said. I was left in care of venerable Simes, the household
   factotum. So far no outward signs of the disease had developed, and I
   enjoyed a tolerable though almost completely private existence during my
   colleague's absence. It was during this time that I read many of the tomes
   Andrews had acquired in the course of his twenty years as a surgeon, and
   learned why his reputation, though locally of the highest, was just a bit
   shady. For the volumes included any number of fanciful subjects hardly
   related to modern medical knowledge: treatises and unauthoritative
   articles on monstrous experiments in surgery; accounts of the bizarre
   effects of glandular transplantation and rejuvenation in animals and men
   alike; brochures on attempted brain transference, and a host of other
   fanatical speculations not countenanced by orthodox physicians. It
   appeared, too, that Andrews was an authority on obscure medicaments; some
   of the few books I waded through revealing that he had spent much time in
   chemistry and in the search for new drugs which might be used as aids in
   surgery. Looking back at those studies now, I find them hellishly
   suggestive when associated with his later experiments.

   Andrews was gone longer than I expected, returning early in November,
   almost four months later; and when he did arrive, I was quite anxious to
   see him, since my condition was at last on the brink of becoming
   noticeable. I had reached a point where I must seek absolute privacy to
   keep from being discovered. But my anxiety was slight as compared with his
   exuberance over a certain new plan he had hatched while in the Indies - a
   plan to be carried out with the aid of a curious drug he had learned of
   from a native "doctor" in Haiti. When he explained that his idea concerned
   me, I became somewhat alarmed; though in my position there could be little
   to make my plight worse. I had, indeed, considered more than once the
   oblivion that would come with a revolver or a plunge from the roof to the
   jagged rocks below.

   On the day after his arrival, in the seclusion of the dimly lit study, he
   outlined the whole grisly scheme. He had found in Haiti a drug, the
   formula for which he would develop later, which induced a state of
   profound sleep in anyone taking it; a trance so deep that death was
   closely counterfeited - with all muscular reflexes, even the respiration
   and heart-beat, completely stilled for the time being. Andrews had, he
   said, seen it demonstrated on natives many times. Some of them remained
   somnolent for days at a time, wholly immobile and as much like death as
   death itself. This suspended animation, he explained further, would even
   pass the closest examination of any medical man. He himself, according to
   all known laws, would have to report as dead a man under the influence of
   such a drug. He stated, too, that the subject's body assumed the precise
   appearance of a corpse - even a slight rigor mortis developing in
   prolonged cases.

   For some time his purpose did not seem wholly clear, but when the full
   import of his words became apparent I felt weak and nauseated. Yet in
   another way I was relieved; for the thing meant at least a partial escape
   from my curse, an escape from the banishment and shame of an ordinary
   death of the dread leprosy. Briefly, his plan was to administer a strong
   dose of the drug to me and call the local authorities, who would
   immediately pronounce me dead, and see that I was buried within a very
   short while. He felt assured that with their careless examination they
   would fail to notice my leprosy symptoms, which in truth had hardly
   appeared. Only a trifle over fifteen months had passed since I had caught
   the disease, whereas the corruption takes seven years to run its entire
   course.

   Later, he said, would come resurrection. After my interment in the family
   graveyard - beside my centuried dwelling and barely a quarter-mile from
   his own ancient pile - the appropriate steps would be taken. Finally, when
   my estate was settled and my decease widely known, he would secretly open
   the tomb and bring me to his own abode again, still alive and none the
   worse for my adventure. It seemed a ghastly and daring plan, but to me it
   offered the only hope for even a partial freedom; so I accepted his
   proposition, but not without a myriad of misgivings. What if the effect of
   the drug should wear off while I was in my tomb? What if the coroner
   should discover the awful ruse, and fail to inter me? These were some of
   the hideous doubts which assailed me before the experiment. Though death
   would have been a release from my curse, I feared it even worse than the
   yellow scourge; feared it even when I could see its black wings constantly
   hovering over me.

   Fortunately I was spared the horror of viewing my own funeral and burial
   rites. They must, however, have gone just as Andrews had planned, even to
   the subsequent disinterment; for after the initial dose of the poison from
   Haiti I lapsed into a semi-paralytic state and from that to a profound,
   night-black sleep. The drug had been administered in my room, and Andrews
   had told me before giving it that he would recommend to the coroner a
   verdict of heart failure due to nerve strain. Of course, there was no
   embalming - Andrews saw to that - and the whole procedure, leading up to
   my secret transportation from the graveyard to his crumbling manor,
   covered a period of three days. Having been buried late in the afternoon
   of the third day, my body was secured by Andrews that very night. He had
   replaced the fresh sod just as it had been when the workmen left. Old
   Simes, sworn to secrecy, had helped Andrews in his ghoulish task.

   Later I had lain for over a week in my old familiar bed. Owing to some
   unexpected effect of the drug, my whole body was completely paralyzed, so
   that I could move my head only slightly. All my senses, however, were
   fully alert, and by another week's time I was able to take nourishment in
   good quantities. Andrews explained that my body would gradually regain its
   former sensibilities; though owing to the presence of the leprosy it might
   take considerable time. He seemed greatly interested in analyzing my daily
   symptoms, and always asked if there was any feeling present in my body.

   Many days passed before I was able to control any part of my anatomy, and
   much longer before the paralysis crept from my enfeebled limbs so that I
   could feel the ordinary bodily reactions. Lying and staring at my numb
   hulk was like having it injected with a perpetual anesthetic. There was a
   total alienation I could not understand, considering that my head and neck
   were quite alive and in good health.

   Andrews explained that he had revived my upper half first and could not
   account for the complete bodily paralysis; though my condition seemed to
   trouble him little considering the damnably intent interest he centered
   upon my reactions and stimuli from the very beginning. Many times during
   lulls in our conversation I would catch a strange gleam in his eyes as he
   viewed me on the couch - a glint of victorious exultation which, queerly
   enough, he never voiced aloud; though he seemed to be quite glad that I
   had run the gauntlet of death and had come through alive. Still, there was
   that horror I was to meet in less than six years, which added to my
   desolation and melancholy during the tedious days in which I awaited the
   return of normal bodily functions. But I would be up and about, he assured
   me, before very long, enjoying an existence few men had ever experienced.
   The words did not, however, impress me with their true and ghastly meaning
   until many days later.

   During that awful siege in bed Andrews and I became somewhat estranged. He
   no longer treated me so much like a friend as like an implement in his
   skilled and greedy fingers. I found him possessed of unexpected traits -
   little examples of baseness and cruelty, apparent even to the hardened
   Simes, which disturbed me in a most unusual manner. Often he would display
   extraordinary cruelty to live specimens in his laboratory, for he was
   constantly carrying on various hidden projects in glandular and muscular
   transplantation on guinea-pigs and rabbits. He had also been employing his
   newly discovered sleeping-potion in curious experiments with suspended
   animation. But of these things he told me very little; though old Simes
   often let slip chance comments which shed some light on the proceedings. I
   was not certain how much the old servant knew, but he had surely learned
   considerable, being a constant companion to both Andrews and myself.

   With the passage of time, a slow but consistent feeling began creeping
   into my disabled body; and at the reviving symptoms Andrews took a
   fanatical interest in my case. He still seemed more coldly analytical than
   sympathetic toward me, taking my pulse and heart-beat with more than usual
   zeal. Occasionally, in his fevered examinations, I saw his hands tremble
   slightly - an uncommon sight with so skilled a surgeon - but he seemed
   oblivious of my scrutiny. I was never allowed even a momentary glimpse of
   my full body, but with the feeble return of the sense of touch, I was
   aware of a bulk and heaviness which at first seemed awkward and
   unfamiliar.

   Gradually I regained the use of my hands and arms; and with the passing of
   the paralysis came a new and terrible sensation of physical estrangement.
   My limbs had difficulty in following the commands of my mind, and every
   movement was jerky and uncertain. So clumsy were my hands, that I had to
   become accustomed to them all over again. This must, I thought, be due to
   my disease and the advance of the contagion in my system. Being unaware of
   how the early symptoms affected the victim (my brother's being a more
   advanced case), I had no means of judging; and since Andrews shunned the
   subject, I deemed it better to remain silent.

   One day I asked Andrews - I no longer considered him a friend - if I might
   try rising and sitting up in bed. At first he objected strenuously, but
   later, after cautioning me to keep the blankets well up around my chin so
   that I would not be chilled, he permitted it. This seemed strange, in view
   of the comfortable temperature. Now that late autumn was slowly turning
   into winter, the room was always well heated. A growing chilliness at
   night, and occasional glimpses of a leaden sky through the window, had
   told me of the changing season; for no calendar was ever in sight upon the
   dingy walls. With the gentle help of Simes I was eased to a sitting
   position, Andrews coldly watching from the door to the laboratory. At my
   success a slow smile spread across his leering features, and he turned to
   disappear from the darkened doorway. His mood did nothing to improve my
   condition. Old Simes, usually so regular and consistent, was now often
   late in his duties, sometimes leaving me alone for hours at a time.

   The terrible sense of alienation was heightened by my new position. It
   seemed that the legs and arms inside my gown were hardly able to follow
   the summoning of my mind, and it became mentally exhausting to continue
   movement for any length of time. My fingers, woefully clumsy, were wholly
   unfamiliar to my inner sense of touch, and I wondered vaguely if I were to
   be accursed the rest of my days with an awkwardness induced by my dread
   malady.

   It was on the evening following my half-recovery that the dreams began. I
   was tormented not only at night but during the day as well. I would
   awaken, screaming horribly, from some frightful nightmare I dared not
   think about outside the realm of sleep. These dreams consisted mainly of
   ghoulish things; graveyards at night, stalking corpses, and lost souls
   amid a chaos of blinding light and shadow. The terrible reality of the
   visions disturbed me most of all: it seemed that some inside influence was
   inducing the grisly vistas of moonlit tombstones and endless catacombs of
   the restless dead. I could not place their source; and at the end of a
   week I was quite frantic with abominable thoughts which seemed to obtrude
   themselves upon my unwelcome consciousness.

   By that time a slow plan was forming whereby I might escape the living
   hell into which I had been propelled. Andrews cared less and less about
   me, seeming intent only on my progress and growth and recovery of normal
   muscular reactions. I was becoming every day more convinced of the
   nefarious doings going on in that laboratory across the threshold - the
   animal cries were shocking, and rasped hideously on my overwrought nerves.
   And I was gradually beginning to think that Andrews had not saved me from
   deportation solely for my own benefit, but for some accursed reason of his
   own. Simes's attention was slowly becoming slighter and slighter, and I
   was convinced that the aged servitor had a hand in the deviltry somewhere.
   Andrews no longer eyed me as a friend, but as an object of
   experimentation; nor did I like the way he fingered his scalpel when he
   stood in the narrow doorway and stared at me with crafty alertness. I had
   never before seen such a transformation come over any man. His ordinarily
   handsome features were now lined and whisker-grown, and his eyes gleamed
   as if some imp of Satan were staring from them. His cold, calculating gaze
   made me shudder horribly, and gave me a fresh determination to free myself
   from his bondage as soon as possible.

   I had lost track of time during my dream-orgy, and had no way of knowing
   how fast the days were passing. The curtains were often drawn in the
   daytime, the room being lit by waxen cylinders in the large candelabrum.
   It was a nightmare of living horror and unreality; though through it all I
   was gradually becoming stronger. I always gave careful responses to
   Andrews' inquiries concerning my returning physical control, concealing
   the fact that a new life was vibrating through me with every passing day -
   an altogether strange sort of strength, but one which I was counting on to
   serve me in the coming crisis.

   Finally, one chilly evening when the candles had been extinguished, and a
   pale shaft of moonlight fell through the dark curtains upon my bed, I
   determined to rise and carry out my plan of action. There had been no
   movement from either of my captors for several hours, and I was confident
   that both were asleep in adjoining bedchambers. Shifting my cumbersome
   weight carefully, I rose to a sitting position and crawled cautiously out
   of bed, down upon the floor. A vertigo gripped me momentarily, and a wave
   of weakness flooded my entire being. But finally strength returned, and by
   clutching at a bed-post I was able to stand upon my feet for the first
   time in many months. Gradually a new strength coursed through me, and I
   donned the dark robe which I had seen hanging on a nearby chair. It was
   quite long, but served as a cloak over my nightdress. Again came that
   feeling of awful unfamiliarity which I had experienced in bed; that sense
   of alienation, and of difficulty in making my limbs perform as they
   should. But there was need for haste before my feeble strength might give
   out. As a last precaution in dressing, I slipped some old shoes over my
   feet; but though I could have sworn they were my own, they seemed
   abnormally loose, so that I decided they must belong to the aged Simes.

   Seeing no other heavy objects in the room, I seized from the table the
   huge candelabrum, upon which the moon shone with a pallid glow, and
   proceeded very quietly toward the laboratory door.

   My first steps came jerkily and with much difficulty, and in the
   semi-darkness I was unable to make my way very rapidly. When I reached the
   threshold, a glance within revealed my former friend seated in a large
   overstuffed chair; while beside him was a smoking-stand upon which were
   assorted bottles and a glass. He reclined half-way in the moonlight
   through the large window, and his greasy features were creased in a
   drunken smirk. An opened book lay in his lap - one of the hideous tomes
   from his private library.

   For a long moment I gloated over the prospect before me, and then,
   stepping forward suddenly, I brought the heavy weapon down upon his
   unprotected head. The dull crunch was followed by a spurt of blood, and
   the fiend crumpled to the floor, his head laid half open. I felt no
   contrition at taking the man's life in such a manner. In the hideous,
   half-visible specimens of his surgical wizardry scattered about the room
   in various stages of completion and preservation, I felt there was enough
   evidence to blast his soul without my aid. Andrews had gone too far in his
   practices to continue living, and as one of his monstrous specimens - of
   that I was now hideously certain - it was my duty to exterminate him.

   Simes, I realized, would be no such easy matter; indeed, only unusual good
   fortune had caused me to find Andrews unconscious. When I finally reeled
   up to the servant's bedchamber door, faint from exhaustion, I knew it
   would take all my remaining strength to complete the ordeal.

   The old man's room was in utmost darkness, being on the north side of the
   structure, but he must have seen me silhouetted in the doorway as I came
   in. He screamed hoarsely, and I aimed the candelabrum at him from the
   threshold. It struck something soft, making a sloughing sound in the
   darkness; but the screaming continued. From that time on events became
   hazy and jumbled together, but I remember grappling with the man and
   choking the life from him little by little. He gibbered a host of awful
   things before I could lay hands on him - cried and begged for mercy from
   my clutching fingers. I hardly realized my own strength in that mad moment
   which left Andrews' associate in a condition like his own.

   Retreating from the darkened chamber, I stumbled for the stairway door,
   sagged through it, and somehow reached the landing below. No lamps were
   burning, and my only light was a filtering of moonbeams coming from the
   narrow windows in the hall. But I made my jerky way over the cold, damp
   slabs of stone, reeling from the terrible weakness of my exertion, and
   reached the front door after ages of fumbling and crawling about in the
   darkness.

   Vague memories and haunting shadows came to taunt me in that ancient
   hallway; shadows once friendly and understandable, but now grown alien and
   unrecognizable, so that I stumbled down the worn steps in a frenzy of
   something more than fear. For a moment I stood in the shadow of the giant
   stone manor, viewing the moonlit trail down which I must go to reach the
   home of my forefathers, only a quarter of a mile distant. But the way
   seemed long, and for a while I despaired of ever traversing the whole of
   it.

   At last I grasped a piece of dead wood as a cane and set out down the
   winding road. Ahead, seemingly only a few rods away in the moonlight,
   stood the venerable mansion where my ancestors had lived and died. Its
   turrets rose spectrally in the shimmering radiance, and the black shadow
   cast on the beetling hillside appeared to shift and waver, as if belonging
   to a castle of unreal substance. There stood the monument of half a
   century; a haven for all my family old and young, which I had deserted
   many years ago to live with the fanatical Andrews. It stood empty on that
   fateful night, and I hope that it may always remain so.

   In some manner I reached the aged place; though I do not remember the last
   half of the journey at all. It was enough to be near the family cemetery,
   among whose moss-covered and crumbling stones I would seek the oblivion I
   had desired. As I approached the moonlit spot the old familiarity - so
   absent during my abnormal existence - returned to plague me in a wholly
   unexpected way. I drew close to my own tombstone, and the feeling of
   homecoming grew stronger; with it came a fresh flood of that awful sense
   of alienation and disembodiment which I knew so well. I was satisfied that
   the end was drawing near; nor did I stop to analyze emotions till a little
   later, when the full horror of my position burst upon me.

   Intuitively I knew my own tombstone; for the grass had scarcely begun to
   grow between the pieces of sod. With feverish haste I began clawing at the
   mound, and scraping the wet earth from the hole left by the removal of the
   grass and roots. How long I worked in the nitrous soil before my fingers
   struck the coffin-lid, I can never say; but sweat was pouring from me and
   my nails were but useless, bleeding hooks.

   At last I threw out the last bit of loose earth, and with trembling
   fingers tugged on the heavy lid. It gave a trifle; and I was prepared to
   lift it completely open when a fetid and nauseous odor assailed my
   nostrils. I started erect, horrified. Had some idiot placed my tombstone
   on the wrong grave, causing me to unearth another body? For surely there
   could be no mistaking that awful stench. Gradually a hideous uncertainty
   came over me and I scrambled from the hole. One look at the newly made
   headpiece was enough. This was indeed my own grave .. . but what fool had
   buried within it another corpse?

   All at once a bit of the unspeakable truth propelled itself upon my brain.
   The odor, in spite of its putrescence, seemed somehow familiar - horribly
   familiar. . . . Yet I could not credit my senses with such an idea.
   Reeling and cursing, I fell into the black cavity once more, and by the
   aid of a hastily lit match, lifted the long lid completely open. Then the
   light went out, as if extinguished by a malignant hand, and I clawed my
   way out of that accursed pit, screaming in a frenzy of fear and loathing.

   When I regained consciousness I was lying before the door of my own
   ancient manor, where I must have crawled after that hideous rendezvous in
   the family cemetery. I realized that dawn was close at hand, and rose
   feebly, opening the aged portal before me and entering the place which had
   known no footsteps for over a decade. A fever was ravaging my weakened
   body, so that I was hardly able to stand, but I made my way slowly through
   the musty, dimly lit chambers and staggered into my own study - the study
   I had deserted so many years before.

   When the sun has risen, I shall go to the ancient well beneath the old
   willow tree by the cemetery and cast my deformed self into it. No other
   man shall ever view this blasphemy which has survived life longer than it
   should have. I do not know what people will say when they see my
   disordered grave, but this will not trouble me if I can find oblivion from
   that which I beheld amidst the crumbling, moss-crusted stones of the
   hideous place.

   I know now why Andrews was so secretive in his actions; so damnably
   gloating in his attitude toward me after my artificial death. He had meant
   me for a specimen all the time - a specimen of his greatest feat of
   surgery, his masterpiece of unclean witchery . . . an example of perverted
   artistry for him alone to see. Where Andrews obtained that other with
   which I lay accursed in his moldering mansion I shall probably never know;
   but I am afraid that it was brought from Haiti along with his fiendish
   medicine. At least these long hairy arms and horrible short legs are alien
   to me ... alien to all natural and sane laws of mankind. The thought that
   I shall be tortured with that other during the rest of my brief existence
   is another hell.

   Now I can but wish for that which once was mine; that which every man
   blessed of God ought to have at death; that which I saw in that awful
   moment in the ancient burial ground when I raised the lid on the coffin -
   my own shrunken, decayed, and headless body.

   The Lovecraft Library wishes to extend its gratitude to Pytheon for
   transcribing this text. 
