Within the Walls of Eryx

  by H. P. Lovecraft and Kenneth Sterling

                                Written Jan 1936

        Published October 1939 in Weird Tales, Vol. 34, No. 4, p. 50-68.

   Before I try to rest I will set down these notes in preparation for the
   report I must make. What I have found is so singular, and so contrary to
   all past experience and expectations, that it deserves a very careful
   description.

   I reached the main landing on Venus, March 18, terrestrial time; VI, 9 of
   the planet's calendar. Being put in the main group under Miller, I
   received my equipment - watch tuned to Venus's slightly quicker rotation -
   and went through the usual mask drill. After two days I was pronounced fit
   for duty.

   Leaving the Crystal Company's post at Terra Nova around dawn, VI, 12, I
   followed the southerly route which Anderson had mapped out from the air.
   The going was bad, for these jungles are always half impassable after a
   rain. It must be the moisture that gives the tangled vines and creepers
   that leathery toughness; a toughness so great that a knife has to work ten
   minutes on some of them. By noon it was dryer - the vegetation getting
   soft and rubbery so that my knife went through it easily - but even then I
   could not make much speed. These Carter oxygen masks are too heavy - just
   carrying one half wears an ordinary man out. A Dubois mask with
   sponge-reservoir instead of tubes would give just as good air at half the
   weight.

   The crystal-detector seemed to function well, pointing steadily in a
   direction verifying Anderson's report. It is curious how that principle of
   affinity works - without any of the fakery of the old 'divining rods' back
   home. There must be a great deposit of crystals within a thousand miles,
   though I suppose those damnable man-lizards always watch and guard it.
   Possibly they think we are just as foolish for coming to Venus to hunt the
   stuff as we think they are for grovelling in the mud whenever they see a
   piece of it, or for keeping that great mass on a pedestal in their temple.
   I wish they'd get a new religion, for they have no use for the crystals
   except to pray to. Barring theology, they would let us take all we want -
   and even if they learned to tap them for power there'd be more than enough
   for their planet and the earth besides. I for one am tired of passing up
   the main deposits and merely seeking separate crystals out of jungle
   river-beds. Sometime I'll urge the wiping out of these scaly beggars by a
   good stiff army from home. About twenty ships could bring enough troops
   across to turn the trick. One can't call the damned things men for all
   their 'cities' and towers. They haven't any skill except building - and
   using swords and poison darts - and I don't believe their so-called
   'cities' mean much more than ant-hills or beaver-dams. I doubt if they
   even have a real language - all the talk about psychological communication
   through those tentacles down their chests strikes me as bunk. What
   misleads people is their upright posture; just an accidental physical
   resemblance to terrestrial man.

   I'd like to go through a Venus jungle for once without having to watch out
   for skulking groups of them or dodge their cursed darts. They may have
   been all right before we began to take the crystals, but they're certainly
   a bad enough nuisance now - with their dart-shooting and their cutting of
   our water pipes. More and more I come to believe that they have a special
   sense like our crystal-detectors. No one ever knew them to bother a man -
   apart from long-distance sniping - who didn't have crystals on him.

   Around 1 P.M. a dart nearly took my helmet off, and I thought for a second
   one of my oxygen tubes was punctured. The sly devils hadn't made a sound,
   but three of them were closing in on me. I got them all by sweeping in a
   circle with my flame pistol, for even though their colour blended with the
   jungle, I could spot the moving creepers. One of them was fully eight feet
   tall, with a snout like a tapir's. The other two were average
   seven-footers. All that makes them hold their own is sheer numbers - even
   a single regiment of flame throwers could raise hell with them. It is
   curious, though, how they've come to be dominant on the planet. Not
   another living thing higher than the wriggling akmans and skorahs, or the
   flying tukahs of the other continent - unless of course those holes in the
   Dionaean Plateau hide something.

   About two o'clock my detector veered westward, indicating isolated
   crystals ahead on the right. This checked up with Anderson, and I turned
   my course accordingly. It was harder going - not only because the ground
   was rising, but because the animal life and carnivorous plants were
   thicker. I was always slashing ugrats and stepping on skorahs, and my
   leather suit was all speckled from the bursting darohs which struck it
   from all sides. The sunlight was all the worse because of the mist, and
   did not seem to dry up the mud in the least. Every time I stepped my feet
   sank down five or six inches, and there was a sucking sort of blup every
   time I pulled them out. I wish somebody would invent a safe kind of
   suiting other than leather for this climate. Cloth of course would rot;
   but some thin metallic tissue that couldn't tear - like the surface of
   this revolving decay-proof record scroll - ought to be feasible sometime.

   I ate about 3:30 - if slipping these wretched food tablets through my mask
   can be called eating. Soon after that I noticed a decided change in the
   landscape - the bright, poisonous-looking flowers shifting in colour and
   getting wraith-like. The outlines of everything shimmered rhythmically,
   and bright points of light appeared and danced in the same slow, steady
   tempo. After that the temperature seemed to fluctuate in unison with a
   peculiar rhythmic drumming.

   The whole universe seemed to be throbbing in deep, regular pulsations that
   filled every corner of space and flowed through my body and mind alike. I
   lost all sense of equilibrium and staggered dizzily, nor did it change
   things in the least when I shut my eyes and covered my ears with my hands.
   However, my mind was still clear, and in a very few minutes I realized
   what had happened.

   I had encountered at last one of those curious mirage-plants about which
   so many of our men told stories. Anderson had warned me of them, and
   described their appearance very closely - the shaggy stalk, the spiky
   leaves, and the mottled blossoms whose gaseous, dream-breeding exhalations
   penetrate every existing make of mask.

   Recalling what happened to Bailey three years ago, I fell into a momentary
   panic, and began to dash and stagger about in the crazy, chaotic world
   which the plant's exhalations had woven around me. Then good sense came
   back, and I realized all I need do was retreat from the dangerous blossoms
   - heading away from the source of the pulsations, and cutting a path
   blindly - regardless of what might seem to swirl around me - until safely
   out of the plant's effective radius.

   Although everything was spinning perilously, I tried to start in the right
   direction and hack my way ahead. My route must have been far from
   straight, for it seemed hours before I was free of the mirage-plant's
   pervasive influence. Gradually the dancing lights began to disappear, and
   the shimmering spectral scenery began to assume the aspect of solidity.
   When I did get wholly clear I looked at my watch and was astonished to
   find that the time was only 4:20. Though eternities had seemed to pass,
   the whole experience could have consumed little more than a half-hour.

   Every delay, however, was irksome, and I had lost ground in my retreat
   from the plant. I now pushed ahead in the uphill direction indicated by
   the crystal-detector, bending every energy toward making better time. The
   jungle was still thick, though there was less animal life. Once a
   carnivorous blossom engulfed my right foot and held it so tightly that I
   had to hack it free with my knife; reducing the flower to strips before it
   let go.

   In less than an hour I saw that the jungle growths were thinning out, and
   by five o'clock - after passing through a belt of tree-ferns with very
   little underbrush - I emerged on a broad mossy plateau. My progress now
   became rapid, and I saw by the wavering of my detector-needle that I was
   getting relatively close to the crystal I sought. This was odd, for most
   of the scattered, egg-like spheroids occurred in jungle streams of a sort
   not likely to be found on this treeless upland.

   The terrain sloped upward, ending in a definite crest. I reached the top
   about 5:30 and saw ahead of me a very extensive plain with forests in the
   distance. This, without question, was the plateau mapped by Matsugawa from
   the air fifty years ago, and called on our maps 'Eryx' or the 'Erycinian
   Highland.' But what made my heart leap was a smaller detail, whose
   position could not have been far from the plain's exact centre. It was a
   single point of light, blazing through the mist and seeming to draw a
   piercing, concentrated luminescence from the yellowish, vapour-dulled
   sunbeams. This, without doubt, was the crystal I sought - a thing possibly
   no larger than a hen's egg, yet containing enough power to keep a city
   warm for a year. I could hardly wonder, as I glimpsed the distant glow,
   that those miserable man-lizards worship such crystals. And yet they have
   not the least notion of the powers they contain.

   Breaking into a rapid run, I tried to reach the unexpected prize as soon
   as possible; and was annoyed when the firm moss gave place to a thin,
   singularly detestable mud studded with occasional patches of weeds and
   creepers. But I splashed on heedlessly - scarcely thinking to look around
   for any of the skulking man-lizards. In this open space I was not very
   likely to be waylaid. As I advanced, the light ahead seemed to grow in
   size and brilliancy, and I began to notice some peculiarity in its
   situation. Clearly, this was a crystal of the very finest quality, and my
   elation grew with every spattering step.

   It is now that I must begin to be careful in making my report, since what
   I shall henceforward have to say involves unprecedented - though
   fortunately verifiable - matters. I was racing ahead with mounting
   eagerness, and had come within a hundred yards or so of the crystal -
   whose position on a sort of raised place in the omnipresent slime seemed
   very odd - when a sudden, overpowering force struck my chest and the
   knuckles of my clenched fists and knocked me over backward into the mud.
   The splash of my fall was terrific, nor did the softness of the ground and
   the presence of some slimy weeds and creepers save my head from a
   bewildering jarring. For a moment I lay supine, too utterly startled to
   think. Then I half mechanically stumbled to my feet and began to scrape
   the worst of the mud and scum from my leather suit.

   Of what I had encountered I could not form the faintest idea. I had seen
   nothing which could have caused the shock, and I saw nothing now. Had I,
   after all, merely slipped in the mud? My sore knuckles and aching chest
   forbade me to think so. Or was this whole incident an illusion brought on
   by some hidden mirage-plant? It hardly seemed probable, since I had none
   of the usual symptoms, and since there was no place near by where so vivid
   and typical a growth could lurk unseen. Had I been on the earth, I would
   have suspected a barrier of N-force laid down by some government to mark a
   forbidden zone, but in this humanless region such a notion would have been
   absurd.

   Finally pulling myself together, I decided to investigate in a cautious
   way. Holding my knife as far as possible ahead of me, so that it might be
   first to feel the strange force, I started once more for the shining
   crystal - preparing to advance step by step with the greatest
   deliberation. At the third step I was brought up short by the impact of
   the knife - point on an apparently solid surface - a solid surface where
   my eyes saw nothing.

   After a moment's recoil I gained boldness. Extending my gloved left hands
   I verified the presence of invisible solid matter - or a tactile illusion
   of solid matter - ahead of me. Upon moving my hand I found that the
   barrier was of substantial extent, and of an almost glassy smoothness,
   with no evidence of the joining of separate blocks. Nerving myself for
   further experiments, I removed a glove and tested the thing with my bare
   hand. It was indeed hard and glassy, and of a curious coldness as
   contrasted with the air around. I strained my eyesight to the utmost in an
   effort to glimpse some trace of the obstructing substance, but could
   discern nothing whatsoever. There was not even any evidence of refractive
   power as judged by the aspect of the landscape ahead. Absence of
   reflective power was proved by the lack of a glowing image of the sun at
   any point.

   Burning curiosity began to displace all other feelings, and I enlarged my
   investigations as best I could. Exploring with my hands, I found that the
   barrier extended from the ground to some level higher than I could reach,
   and that it stretched off indefinitely on both sides. It was, then, a wall
   of some kind - though all guesses as to its materials and its purpose were
   beyond me. Again I thought of the mirage-plant and the dreams it induced,
   but a moment's reasoning put this out of my head.

   Knocking sharply on the barrier with the hilt of my knife, and kicking at
   it with my heavy boots, I tried to interpret the sounds thus made. There
   was something suggestive of cement or concrete in these reverberations,
   though my hands had found the surface more glassy or metallic in feel.
   Certainly, I was confronting something strange beyond all previous
   experience.

   The next logical move was to get some idea of the wall's dimensions. The
   height problem would be hard, if not insoluble, but the length and shape
   problem could perhaps be sooner dealt with. Stretching out my arms and
   pressing close to the barrier, I began to edge gradually to the left -
   keeping very careful track of the way I faced. After several steps I
   concluded that the wall was not straight, but that I was following part of
   some vast circle or ellipse. And then my attention was distracted by
   something wholly different - something connected with the still-distant
   crystal which had formed the object of my quest.

   I have said that even from a great distance the shining object's position
   seemed indefinably queer - on a slight mound rising from the slime. Now -
   at about a hundred yards - I could see plainly despite the engulfing mist
   just what that mound was. It was the body of a man in one of the Crystal
   Company's leather suits, lying on his back, and with his oxygen mask half
   buried in the mud a few inches away. In his right hand, crushed
   convulsively against his chest, was the crystal which had led me here - a
   spheroid of incredible size, so large that the dead fingers could scarcely
   close over it. Even at the given distance I could see that the body was a
   recent one. There was little visible decay, and I reflected that in this
   climate such a thing meant death not more than a day before. Soon the
   hateful farnoth-flies would begin to cluster about the corpse. I wondered
   who the man was. Surely no one I had seen on this trip. It must have been
   one of the old-timers absent on a long roving commission, who had come to
   this especial region independently of Anderson's survey. There he lay,
   past all trouble, and with the rays of the great crystal streaming out
   from between his stiffened fingers.

   For fully five minutes I stood there staring in bewilderment and
   apprehension. A curious dread assailed me, and I had an unreasonable
   impulse to run away. It could not have been done by those slinking
   man-lizards, for he still held the crystal he had found. Was there any
   connexion with the invisible wall? Where had he found the crystal?
   Anderson's instrument had indicated one in this quarter well before this
   man could have perished. I now began to regard the unseen barrier as
   something sinister, and recoiled from it with a shudder. Yet I knew I must
   probe the mystery all the more quickly and thoroughly because of this
   recent tragedy.

   Suddenly - wrenching my mind back to the problem I faced - I thought of a
   possible means of testing the wall's height, or at least of finding
   whether or not it extended indefinitely upward. Seizing a handful of mud,
   I let it drain until it gained some coherence and then flung it high in
   the air toward the utterly transparent barrier. At a height of perhaps
   fourteen feet it struck the invisible surface with a resounding splash,
   disintegrating at once and oozing downward in disappearing streams with
   surprising rapidity. Plainly, the wall was a lofty one. A second handful,
   hurled at an even sharper angle, hit the surface about eighteen feet from
   the ground and disappeared as quickly as the first.

   I now summoned up all my strength and prepared to throw a third handful as
   high as I possibly could. Letting the mud drain, and squeezing it to
   maximum dryness, I flung it up so steeply that I feared it might not reach
   the obstructing surface at all. It did, however, and this time it crossed
   the barrier and fell in the mud beyond with a violent spattering. At last
   I had a rough idea of the height of the wall, for the crossing had
   evidently occurred some twenty or twenty-one feet aloft.

   With a nineteen - or twenty-foot vertical wall of glassy flatness, ascent
   was clearly impossible. I must, then, continue to circle the barrier in
   the hope of finding a gate, an ending, or some sort of interruption. Did
   the obstacle form a complete round or other closed figure, or was it
   merely an arc or semi-circle? Acting on my decision, I resumed my slow
   leftward circling, moving my hands up and down over the unseen surface on
   the chance of finding some window or other small aperture. Before
   starting, I tried to mark my position by kicking a hole in the mud, but
   found the slime too thin to hold any impression. I did, though, gauge the
   place approximately by noting a tall cycad in the distant forest which
   seemed just on a line with the gleaming crystal a hundred yards away. If
   no gate or break existed I could now tell when I had completely
   circumnavigated the wall.

   I had not progressed far before I decided that the curvature indicated a
   circular enclosure of about a hundred yards' diameter - provided the
   outline was regular. This would mean that the dead man lay near the wall
   at a point almost opposite the region where I had started. Was he just
   inside or just outside the enclosure? This I would soon ascertain.

   As I slowly rounded the barrier without finding any gate, window, or other
   break, I decided that the body was lying within. On closer view the
   features of the dead man seemed vaguely disturbing. I found something
   alarming in his expression, and in the way the glassy eyes stared. By the
   time I was very near I believed I recognized him as Dwight, a veteran whom
   I had never known, but who was pointed out to me at the post last year.
   The crystal he clutched was certainly a prize - the largest single
   specimen I had ever seen.

   I was so near the body that I could - but for the barrier - have touched
   it, when my exploring left hand encountered a corner in the unseen
   surface. In a second I had learned that there was an opening about three
   feet wide, extending from the ground to a height greater than I could
   reach. There was no door, nor any evidence of hingemarks bespeaking a
   former door. Without a moment's hesitation I stepped through and advanced
   two paces to the prostrate body - which lay at right angles to the hallway
   I had entered, in what seemed to be an intersecting doorless corridor. It
   gave me a fresh curiosity to find that the interior of this vast enclosure
   was divided by partitions.

   Bending to examine the corpse, I discovered that it bore no wounds. This
   scarcely surprised me, since the continued presence of the crystal argued
   against the pseudo-reptilian natives. Looking about for some possible
   cause of death, my eyes lit upon the oxygen mask lying close to the body's
   feet. Here, indeed, was something significant. Without this device no
   human being could breathe the air of Venus for more than thirty seconds,
   and Dwight - if it were he - had obviously lost his. Probably it had been
   carelessly buckled, so that the weight of the tubes worked the straps
   loose - a thing which could not happen with a Dubois sponge-reservoir
   mask. The half-minute of grace had been too short to allow the man to
   stoop and recover his protection - or else the cyanogen content of the
   atmosphere was abnormally high at the time. Probably he had been busy
   admiring the crystal - wherever he may have found it. He had, apparently,
   just taken it from the pouch in his suit, for the flap was unbuttoned.

   I now proceeded to extricate the huge crystal from the dead prospector's
   fingers - a task which the body's stiffness made very difficult. The
   spheroid was larger than a man's fist, and glowed as if alive in the
   reddish rays of the weltering sun. As I touched the gleaming surface I
   shuddered involuntarily - as if by taking this precious object I had
   transferred to myself the doom which had overtaken its earlier bearer.
   However, my qualms soon passed, and I carefully buttoned the crystal into
   the pouch of my leather suit. Superstition has never been one of my
   failings.

   Placing the man's helmet over his dead, staring face, I straightened up
   and stepped back through the unseen doorway to the entrance hall of the
   great enclosure. All my curiosity about the strange edifice now returned,
   and I racked my brains with speculations regarding its material, origin,
   and purpose. That the hands of men had reared it I could not for a moment
   believe. Our ships first reached Venus only seventy-two years ago, and the
   only human beings on the planet have been those at Terra Nova. Nor does
   human knowledge include any perfectly transparent, non-refractive solid
   such as the substance of this building. Prehistoric human invasions of
   Venus can be pretty well ruled out, so that one must turn to the idea of
   native construction. Did a forgotten race of highly-evolved beings precede
   the man-lizards as masters of Venus? Despite their elaborately-built
   cities, it seemed hard to credit the pseudo-reptiles with anything of this
   kind. There must have been another race aeons ago, of which this is
   perhaps the last relique. Or will other ruins of kindred origin be found
   by future expeditions? The purpose of such a structure passes all
   conjecture - but its strange and seemingly non-practical material suggests
   a religious use.

   Realizing my inability to solve these problems, I decided that all I could
   do was to explore the invisible structure itself. That various rooms and
   corridors extended over the seemingly unbroken plain of mud I felt
   convinced; and I believed that a knowledge of their plan might lead to
   something significant. So, feeling my way back through the doorway and
   edging past the body, I began to advance along the corridor toward those
   interior regions whence the dead man had presumably come. Later on I would
   investigate the hallway I had left.

   Groping like a blind man despite the misty sunlight, I moved slowly
   onward. Soon the corridor turned sharply and began to spiral in toward the
   centre in ever-diminishing curves. Now and then my touch would reveal a
   doorless intersecting passage, and I several times encountered junctions
   with two, three, and four diverging avenues. In these latter cases I
   always followed the inmost route, which seemed to form a continuation of
   the one I had been traversing. There would be plenty of time to examine
   the branches after I had reached and returned from the main regions. I can
   scarcely describe the strangeness of the experience - threading the unseen
   ways of an invisible structure reared by forgotten hands on an alien
   planet!

   At last, still stumbling and groping, I felt the corridor end in a
   sizeable open space. Fumbling about, I found I was in a circular chamber
   about ten feet across; and from the position of the dead man against
   certain distant forest landmarks I judged that this chamber lay at or near
   the centre of the edifice. Out of it opened five corridors besides the one
   through which I had entered, but I kept the latter in mind by sighting
   very carefully past the body to a particular tree on the horizon as I
   stood just within the entrance.

   There was nothing in this room to distinguish it - merely the floor of
   thin mud which was everywhere present. Wondering whether this part of the
   building had any roof, I repeated my experiment with an upward-flung
   handful of mud, and found at once that no covering existed. If there had
   ever been one, it must have fallen long ago, for not a trace of debris or
   scattered blocks ever halted my feet. As I reflected, it struck me as
   distinctly odd that this apparently primordial structure should be so
   devoid of tumbling masonry, gaps in the walls, and other common attributes
   of dilapidation.

   What was it? What had it ever been? Of what was it made? Why was there no
   evidence of separate blocks in the glassy, bafflingly homogenous walls?
   Why were there no traces of doors, either interior or exterior? I knew
   only that I was in a round, roofless, doorless edifice of some hard,
   smooth, perfectly transparent, non-refractive and non-reflective material,
   a hundred yards in diameter, with many corridors, and with a small
   circular room at the centre. More than this I could never learn from a
   direct investigation.

   I now observed that the sun was sinking very low in the west - a
   golden-ruddy disc floating in a pool of scarlet and orange above the
   mist-clouded trees of the horizon. Plainly, I would have to hurry if I
   expected to choose a sleeping-spot on dry ground before dark. I had long
   before decided to camp for the night on the firm, mossy rim of the plateau
   near the crest whence I had first spied the shining crystal, trusting to
   my usual luck to save me from an attack by the man-lizards. It has always
   been my contention that we ought to travel in parties of two or more, so
   that someone can be on guard during sleeping hours, but the really small
   number of night attacks makes the Company careless about such things.
   Those scaly wretches seem to have difficulty in seeing at night, even with
   curious glow torches.

   Having picked out again the hallway through which I had come, I started to
   return to the structure's entrance. Additional exploration could wait for
   another day. Groping a course as best I could through the spiral corridors
   - with only general sense, memory, and a vague recognition of some of the
   ill-defined weed patches on the plain as guides - I soon found myself once
   more in close proximity to the corpse. There were now one or two farnoth
   flies swooping over the helmet-covered face, and I knew that decay was
   setting in. With a futile instinctive loathing I raised my hand to brush
   away his vanguard of the scavengers - when a strange and astonishing thing
   became manifest. An invisible wall, checking the sweep of my arm, told me
   that - notwithstanding my careful retracing of the way - I had not indeed
   returned to the corridor in which the body lay. Instead, I was in a
   parallel hallway, having no doubt taken some wrong turn or fork among the
   intricate passages behind.

   Hoping to find a doorway to the exit hall ahead, I continued my advance,
   but presently came to a blank wall. I would, then, have to return to the
   central chamber and steer my course anew. Exactly where I had made my
   mistake I could not tell. I glanced at the ground to see if by any miracle
   guiding footprints had remained, but at once realized that the thin mud
   held impressions only for a very few moments. There was little difficulty
   in finding my way to the centre again, and once there I carefully
   reflected on the proper outward course. I had kept too far to the right
   before. This time I must take a more leftward fork somewhere - just where,
   I could decide as I went.

   As I groped ahead a second time I felt quite confident of my correctness,
   and diverged to the left at a junction I was sure I remembered. The
   spiralling continued, and I was careful not to stray into any intersecting
   passages. Soon, however, I saw to my disgust that I was passing the body
   at a considerable distance; this passage evidently reached the outer wall
   at a point much beyond it. In the hope that another exit might exist in
   the half of the wall I had not yet explored, I pressed forward for several
   paces, but eventually came once more to a solid barrier. Clearly, the plan
   of the building was even more complicated than I had thought.

   I now debated whether to return to the centre again or whether to try some
   of the lateral corridors extending toward the body. If I chose this second
   alternative, I would run the risk of breaking my mental pattern of where I
   was; hence I had better not attempt it unless I could think of some way of
   leaving a visible trail behind me. Just how to leave a trail would be
   quite a problem, and I ransacked my mind for a solution. There seemed to
   be nothing about my person which could leave a mark on anything, nor any
   material which I could scatter - or minutely subdivide and scatter.

   My pen had no effect on the invisible wall, and I could not lay a trail of
   my precious food tablets. Even had I been willing to spare the latter,
   there would not have been even nearly enough - besides which the small
   pellets would have instantly sunk from sight in the thin mud. I searched
   my pockets for an old-fashioned note-book - often used unofficially on
   Venus despite the quick rotting-rate of paper in the planet's atmosphere -
   whose pages I could tear up and scatter, but could find none. It was
   obviously impossible to tear the tough, thin metal of this revolving
   decay-proof record scroll, nor did my clothing offer any possibilities. In
   Venus's peculiar atmosphere I could not safely spare my stout leather
   suit, and underwear had been eliminated because of the climate.

   I tried to smear mud on the smooth, invisible walls after squeezing it as
   dry as possible, but found that it slipped from sight as quickly as did
   the height-testing handfuls I had previously thrown. Finally I drew out my
   knife and attempted to scratch a line on the glassy, phantom surface -
   something I could recognize with my hand, even though I would not have the
   advantage of seeing it from afar. It was useless, however, for the blade
   made not the slightest impression on the baffling, unknown material.

   Frustrated in all attempts to blaze a trail, I again sought the round
   central chamber through memory. It seemed easier to act back to this room
   than to steer a definite, predetermined course away from it, and I had
   little difficulty in finding it anew. This time I listed on my record
   scroll every turn I made - drawing a crude hypothetical diagram of my
   route, and marking all diverging corridors. It was, of course, maddeningly
   slow work when everything had to be determined by touch, and the
   possibilities of error were infinite; but I believed it would pay in the
   long run.

   The long twilight of Venus was thick when I reached the central room, but
   I still had hopes of gaining the outside before dark. Comparing my fresh
   diagram with previous recollections, I believed I had located my original
   mistake, so once more set out confidently along the invisible hall-ways. I
   veered further to the left than during my previous attempts, and tried to
   keep track of my turnings on the records scroll in case I was still
   mistaken. In the gathering dusk I could see the dim line of the corpse,
   now the centre of a loathsome cloud of farnoth-flies. Before long, no
   doubt, the mud-dwelling sificlighs would be oozing in from the plain to
   complete the ghastly work. Approaching the body with some reluctance I was
   preparing to step past it when a sudden collision with a wall told me I
   was again astray.

   I now realized plainly that I was lost. The complications of this building
   were too much for offhand solution, and I would probably have to do some
   careful checking before I could hope to emerge. Still, I was eager to get
   to dry ground before total darkness set in; hence I returned once more to
   the centre and began a rather aimless series of trials and errors - making
   notes by the light of my electric lamp. When I used this device I noticed
   with interest that it produced no reflection - not even the faintest
   glistening - in the transparent walls around me. I was, however, prepared
   for this; since the sun had at no time formed a gleaming image in the
   strange material.

   I was still groping about when the dusk became total. A heavy mist
   obscured most of the stars and planets, but the earth was plainly visible
   as a glowing, bluish-green point in the southeast. It was just past
   opposition, and would have been a glorious sight in a telescope. I could
   even make out the moon beside it whenever the vapours momentarily thinned.
   It was now impossible to see the corpse - my only landmark - so I
   blundered back to the central chamber after a few false turns. After all,
   I would have to give up hope of sleeping on dry ground. Nothing could be
   done till daylight, and I might as well make the best of it here. Lying
   down in the mud would not be pleasant, but in my leather suit it could be
   done. On former expeditions I had slept under even worse conditions, and
   now sheer exhaustion would help to conquer repugnance.

   So here I am, squatting in the slime of the central room and making these
   notes on my record scroll by the light of the electric lamp. There is
   something almost humorous in my strange, unprecedented plight. Lost in a
   building without doors - a building which I cannot see! I shall doubtless
   get out early in the morning, and ought to be back at Terra Nova with the
   crystal by late afternoon. It certainly is a beauty - with surprising
   lustre even in the feeble light of this lamp. I have just had it out
   examining it. Despite my fatigue, sleep is slow in coming, so I find
   myself writing at great length. I must stop now. Not much danger of being
   bothered by those cursed natives in this place. The thing I like least is
   the corpse - but fortunately my oxygen mask saves me from the worst
   effects. I am using the chlorate cubes very sparingly. Will take a couple
   of food tablets now and turn in. More later.

                           LATER - AFTERNOON, VI, 13

   There has been more trouble than I expected. I am still in the building,
   and will have to work quickly and wisely if I expect to rest on dry ground
   tonight. It took me a long time to get to sleep, and I did not wake till
   almost noon today. As it was, I would have slept longer but for the glare
   of the sun through the haze. The corpse was a rather bad sight - wriggling
   with sificlighs, and with a cloud of farnoth-flies around it. Something
   had pushed the helmet away from the face, and it was better not to look at
   it. I was doubly glad of my oxygen mask when I thought of the situation.

   At length I shook and brushed myself dry, took a couple of food tablets,
   and put a new potassium chlorate cube in the electrolyser of the mask. I
   am using these cubes slowly, but wish I had a larger supply. I felt much
   better after my sleep, and expected to get out of the building very
   shortly.

   Consulting the notes and sketches I had jotted down, I was impressed by
   the complexity of the hallways, and by the possibility that I had made a
   fundamental error. Of the six openings leading out of the central space, I
   had chosen a certain one as that by which I had entered - using a
   sighting-arrangement as a guide. When I stood just within the opening, the
   corpse fifty yards away was exactly in line with a particular
   lepidodendron in the far-off forest. Now it occurred to me that this
   sighting might not have been of sufficient accuracy - the distance of the
   corpse making its difference of direction in relation to the horizon
   comparatively slight when viewed from the openings next to that of my
   first ingress. Moreover, the tree did not differ as distinctly as it might
   from other lepidodendra on the horizon.

   Putting the matter to a test, I found to my chagrin that I could not be
   sure which of three openings was the right one. Had I traversed a
   different set of windings at each attempted exit? This time I would be
   sure. It struck me that despite the impossibility of trail-blazing there
   was one marker I could leave. Though I could not spare my suit, I could -
   because of my thick head of hair - spare my helmet; and this was large and
   light enough to remain visible above the thin mud. Accordingly I removed
   the roughly hemi-spherical device and laid it at the entrance of one of
   the corridors - the right-hand one of the three I must try.

   I would follow this corridor on the assumption that it was correct;
   repeating what I seemed to recall as the proper turns, and constantly
   consulting and making notes. If I did not get out, I would systematically
   exhaust all possible variations; and if these failed, I would proceed to
   cover the avenues extending from the next opening in the same way -
   continuing to the third opening if necessary. Sooner or later I could not
   avoid hitting the right path to the exit, but I must use patience. Even at
   worst, I could scarcely fail to reach the open plain in time for a dry
   night's sleep.

   Immediate results were rather discouraging, though they helped me
   eliminate the right-hand opening in little more than an hour. Only a
   succession of blind alleys, each ending at a great distance from the
   corpse, seemed to branch from this hallway; and I saw very soon that it
   had not figured at all in the previous afternoon's wanderings. As before,
   however, I always found it relatively easy to grope back to the central
   chamber.

   About 1 P.M. I shifted my helmet marker to the next opening and began to
   explore the hallways beyond it. At first I thought I recognized the
   turnings, but soon found myself in a wholly unfamiliar set of corridors. I
   could not get near the corpse, and this time seemed cut off from the
   central chamber as well, even though I thought I had recorded every move I
   made. There seemed to be tricky twists and crossings too subtle for me to
   capture in my crude diagrams, and I began to develop a kind of mixed anger
   and discouragement. While patience would of course win in the end, I saw
   that my searching would have to be minute, tireless and long-continued.

   Two o'clock found me still wandering vainly through strange corridors -
   constantly feeling my way, looking alternately at my helmet and at the
   corpse, and jotting data on my scroll with decreasing confidence. I cursed
   the stupidity and idle curiosity which had drawn me into this tangle of
   unseen walls - reflecting that if I had let the thing alone and headed
   back as soon as I had taken the crystal from the body, I would even now be
   safe at Terra Nova.

   Suddenly it occurred to me that I might be able to tunnel under the
   invisible walls with my knife, and thus effect a short cut to the outside
   - or to some outward-leading corridor. I had no means of knowing how deep
   the building's foundations were, but the omnipresent mud argued the
   absence of any floor save the earth. Facing the distant and increasingly
   horrible corpse, I began a course of feverish digging with the broad,
   sharp blade.

   There was about six inches of semi-liquid mud, below which the density of
   the soil increased sharply. This lower soil seemed to be of a different
   colour - a greyish clay rather like the formations near Venus's north
   pole. As I continued downward close to the unseen barrier I saw that the
   ground was getting harder and harder. Watery mud rushed into the
   excavation as fast as I removed the clay, but I reached through it and
   kept on working. If I could bore any kind of a passage beneath the wall,
   the mud would not stop my wriggling out.

   About three feet down, however, the hardness of the soil halted my digging
   seriously. Its tenacity was beyond anything I had encountered before, even
   on this planet, and was linked with an anomalous heaviness. My knife had
   to split and chip the tightly packed clay, and the fragments I brought up
   were like solid stones or bits of metal. Finally even this splitting and
   chipping became impossible, and I had to cease my work with no lower edge
   of wall in reach.

   The hour-long attempt was a wasteful as well as futile one, for it used up
   great stores of my energy and forced me both to take an extra food tablet,
   and to put an additional chlorate cube in the oxygen mask. It has also
   brought a pause in the day's gropings, for I am still much too exhausted
   to walk. After cleaning my hands and arms of the worst of the mud I sat
   down to write these notes - leaning against an invisible wall and facing
   away from the corpse.

   That body is simply a writhing mass of vermin now - the odour has begun to
   draw some of the slimy akmans from the far-off jungle. I notice that many
   of the efjeh-weeds on the plain are reaching out necrophagous feelers
   toward the thing; but I doubt if any are long enough to reach it. I wish
   some really carnivorous organisms like the skorahs would appear, for then
   they might scent me and wriggle a course through the building toward me.
   Things like that have an odd sense of direction. I could watch them as
   they came, and jot down their approximate route if they failed to form a
   continuous line. Even that would be a great help. When I met any the
   pistol would make short work of them.

   But I can hardly hope for as much as that. Now that these notes are made I
   shall rest a while longer, and later will do some more groping. As soon as
   I get back to the central chamber - which ought to be fairly easy - I
   shall try the extreme left-hand opening. Perhaps I can get outside by dusk
   after all.

                                 NIGHT - VI, 13

   New trouble. My escape will be tremendously difficult, for there are
   elements I had not suspected. Another night here in the mud, and a fight
   on my hands tomorrow. I cut my rest short and was up and groping again by
   four o'clock. After about fifteen minutes I reached the central chamber
   and moved my helmet to mark the last of the three possible doorways.
   Starting through this opening, I seemed to find the going more familiar,
   but was brought up short less than five minutes by a sight that jolted me
   more than I can describe.

   It was a group of four or five of those detestable man-lizards emerging
   from the forest far off across the plain. I could not see them distinctly
   at that distance, but thought they paused and turned toward the trees to
   gesticulate, after which they were joined by fully a dozen more. The
   augmented party now began to advance directly toward the invisible
   building, and as they approached I studied them carefully. I had never
   before had a close view of the things outside the steamy shadows of the
   jungle.

   The resemblance to reptiles was perceptible, though I knew it was only an
   apparent one, since these beings have no point of contact with terrestrial
   life. When they drew nearer they seemed less truly reptilian - only the
   flat head and the green, slimy, frog-like skin carrying out the idea. They
   walked erect on their odd, thick stumps, and their suction-discs made
   curious noises in the mud. These were average specimens, about seven feet
   in height, and with four long, ropy pectoral tentacles. The motions of
   those tentacles - if the theories of Fogg, Ekberg, and Janat are right,
   which I formerly doubted but am now more ready to believe - indicate that
   the things were in animated conversation.

   I drew my flame pistol and was ready for a hard fight. The odds were bad,
   but the weapon gave me a certain advantage. If the things knew this
   building they would come through it after me, and in this way would form a
   key to getting out; just as carnivorous skorahs might have done. That they
   would attack me seemed certain; for even though they could not see the
   crystal in my pouch, they could divine its presence through that special
   sense of theirs.

   Yet, surprisingly enough, they did not attack me. Instead they scattered
   and formed a vast circle around me - at a distance which indicated that
   they were pressing close to the unseen wall. Standing there in a ring, the
   beings stared silently and inquisitively at me, waving their tentacles and
   sometimes nodding their heads and gesturing with their upper limbs. After
   a while I saw others issue from the forest, and these advanced and joined
   the curious crowd. Those near the corpse looked briefly at it but made no
   move to disturb it. It was a horrible sight, yet the man-lizards seemed
   quite unconcerned. Now and then one of them would brush away the
   farnoth-flies with its limbs or tentacles, or crush a wriggling sificligh
   or akman, or an out-reaching efjeh-weed, with the suction discs on its
   stumps.

   Staring back at these grotesque and unexpected intruders, and wondering
   uneasily why they did not attack me at once, I lost for the time being the
   will-power and nervous energy to continue my search for a way out. Instead
   I leaned limply against the invisible wall of the passage where I stood,
   letting my wonder merge gradually into a chain of the wildest
   speculations. A hundred mysteries which had previously baffled me seemed
   all at once to take on a new and sinister significance, and I trembled
   with an acute fear unlike anything I had experienced before.

   I believed I knew why these repulsive beings were hovering expectantly
   around me. I believed, too, that I had the secret of the transparent
   structure at last. The alluring crystal which I had seized, the body of
   the man who had seized it before me - all these things began to acquire a
   dark and threatening meaning.

   It was no common series of mischances which had made me lose my way in
   this roofless, unseen tangle of corridors. Far from it. Beyond doubt, the
   place was a genuine maze - a labyrinth deliberately built by these hellish
   things whose craft and mentality I had so badly underestimated. Might I
   not have suspected this before, knowing of their uncanny architectural
   skill? The purpose was all too plain. It was a trap - a trap set to catch
   human beings, and with the crystal spheroid as bait. These reptilian
   things, in their war on the takers of crystals, had turned to strategy and
   were using our own cupidity against us.

   Dwight - if this rotting corpse were indeed he - was a victim. He must
   have been trapped some time ago, and had failed to find his way out. Lack
   of water had doubtless maddened him, and perhaps he had run out of
   chlorate cubes as well. Probably his mask had not slipped accidentally
   after all. Suicide was a likelier thing. Rather than face a lingering
   death he had solved the issue by removing the mask deliberately and
   letting the lethal atmosphere do its work at once. The horrible irony of
   his fate lay in his position - only a few feet from the saving exit he had
   failed to find. One minute more of searching and he would have been safe.

   And now I was trapped as he had been. Trapped, and with this circling herd
   of curious starers to mock at my predicament. The thought was maddening,
   and as it sank in I was seized with a sudden flash of panic which set me
   running aimlessly through the unseen hallways. For several moments I was
   essentially a maniac - stumbling, tripping, bruising myself on the
   invisible walls, and finally collapsing in the mud as a panting, lacerated
   heap of mindless, bleeding flesh.

   The fall sobered me a bit, so that when I slowly struggled to my feet I
   could notice things and exercise my reason. The circling watchers were
   swaying their tentacles in an odd, irregular way suggestive of sly, alien
   laughter, and I shook my fist savagely at them as I rose. My gesture
   seemed to increase their hideous mirth - a few of them clumsily imitating
   it with their greenish upper limbs. Shamed into sense, I tried to collect
   my faculties and take stock of the situation.

   After all, I was not as badly off as Dwight has been. Unlike him, I knew
   what the situation was - and forewarned is forearmed. I had proof that the
   exit was attainable in the end, and would not repeat his tragic act of
   impatient despair. The body - or skeleton, as it would soon be - was
   constantly before me as a guide to the sought-for aperture, and dogged
   patience would certainly take me to it if I worked long and intelligently
   enough.

   I had, however, the disadvantage of being surrounded by these reptilian
   devils. Now that I realized the nature of the trap - whose invisible
   material argued a science and technology beyond anything on earth - I
   could no longer discount the mentality and resources of my enemies. Even
   with my flame-pistol I would have a bad time getting away - though
   boldness and quickness would doubtless see me through in the long run.

   But first I must reach the exterior - unless I could lure or provoke some
   of the creatures to advance toward me. As I prepared my pistol for action
   and counted over my generous supply of ammunition it occurred to me to try
   the effect of its blasts on the invisible walls. Had I overlooked a
   feasible means of escape? There was no clue to the chemical composition of
   the transparent barrier, and conceivably it might be something which a
   tongue of fire could cut like cheese. Choosing a section facing the
   corpse, I carefully discharged the pistol at close range and felt with my
   knife where the blast had been aimed. Nothing was changed. I had seen the
   flame spread when it struck the surface, and now I realized that my hope
   had been vain. Only a long, tedious search for the exit would ever bring
   me to the outside.

   So, swallowing another food tablet and putting another cube in the
   elecrolyser of my mask, I recommenced the long quest; retracing my steps
   to the central chamber and starting out anew. I constantly consulted my
   notes and sketches, and made fresh ones - taking one false turn after
   another, but staggering on in desperation till the afternoon light grew
   very dim. As I persisted in my quest I looked from time to time at the
   silent circle of mocking stares, and noticed a gradual replacement in
   their ranks. Every now and then a few would return to the forest, while
   others would arrive to take their places. The more I thought of their
   tactics the less I liked them, for they gave me a hint of the creatures'
   possible motives. At any time these devils could have advanced and fought
   me, but they seemed to prefer watching my struggles to escape. I could not
   but infer that they enjoyed the spectacle - and this made me shrink with
   double force from the prospect of falling into their hands.

   With the dark I ceased my searching, and sat down in the mud to rest. Now
   I am writing in the light of my lamp, and will soon try to get some sleep.
   I hope tomorrow will see me out; for my canteen is low, and lacol tablets
   are a poor substitute for water. I would hardly dare to try the moisture
   in this slime, for none of the water in the mud-regions is potable except
   when distilled. That is why we run such long pipe lines to the yellow clay
   regions - or depend on rain-water when those devils find and cut our
   pipes. I have none too many chlorate cubes either, and must try to cut
   down my oxygen consumption as much as I can. My tunnelling attempt of the
   early afternoon, and my later panic flight, burned up a perilous amount of
   air. Tomorrow I will reduce physical exertion to the barest minimum until
   I meet the reptiles and have to deal with them. I must have a good cube
   supply for the journey back to Terra Nova. My enemies are still on hand; I
   can see a circle of their feeble glow-torches around me. There is a horror
   about those lights which will keep me awake.

                                 NIGHT - VI, 14

   Another full day of searching and still no way out! I am beginning to be
   worried about the water problem, for my canteen went dry at noon. In the
   afternoon there was a burst of rain, and I went back to the central
   chamber for the helmet which I had left as a marker - using this as a bowl
   and getting about two cupfuls of water. I drank most of it, but have put
   the slight remainder in my canteen. Lacol tablets make little headway
   against real thirst, and I hope there will be more rain in the night. I am
   leaving my helmet bottom up to catch any that falls. Food tablets are none
   too plentiful, but not dangerously low. I shall halve my rations from now
   on. The chlorate cubes are my real worry, for even without violent
   exercise the day's endless tramping burned a dangerous number. I feel weak
   from my forced economies in oxygen, and from my constantly mounting
   thirst. When I reduce my food I suppose I shall feel still weaker.

   There is something damnable - something uncanny - about this labyrinth. I
   could swear that I had eliminated certain turns through charting, and yet
   each new trial belies some assumption I had thought established. Never
   before did I realize how lost we are without visual landmarks. A blind man
   might do better - but for most of us sight is the king of the senses. The
   effect of all these fruitless wanderings is one of profound
   discouragement. I can understand how poor Dwight must have felt. His
   corpse is now just a skeleton, and the sificlighs and akmans and
   farnoth-flies are gone. The efjen-weeds are nipping the leather clothing
   to pieces, for they were longer and faster-growing than I had expected.
   And all the while those relays of tentacled starers stand gloatingly
   around the barrier laughing at me and enjoying my misery. Another day and
   I shall go mad if I do not drop dead from exhaustion.

   However, there is nothing to do but persevere. Dwight would have got out
   if he had kept on a minute longer. It is just possible that somebody from
   Terra Nova will come looking for me before long, although this is only my
   third day out. My muscles ache horribly, and I can't seem to rest at all
   lying down in this loathesome mud. Last night, despite my terrific
   fatigue, I slept only fitfully, and tonight I fear will be no better. I
   live in an endless nightmare - poised between waking and sleeping, yet
   neither truly awake nor truly asleep. My hand shakes, I can write no more
   for the time being. That circle of feeble glow-torches is hideous.

                            LATE AFTERNOON - VI, 15

   Substantial progress! Looks good. Very weak, and did not sleep much till
   daylight. Then I dozed till noon, though without being at all rested. No
   rain, and thirst leaves me very weak. Ate an extra food tablet to keep me
   going, but without water it didn't help much. I dared to try a little of
   the slime water just once, but it made me violently sick and left me even
   thirstier than before. Must save chlorate cubes, so am nearly suffocating
   for lack of oxygen. Can't walk much of the time, but manage to crawl in
   the mud. About 2 P.M. I thought I recognized some passages, and got
   substantially nearer to the corpse - or skeleton - than I had been since
   the first day's trials. I was sidetracked once in a blind alley, but
   recovered the main trail with the aid of my chart and notes. The trouble
   with these jottings is that there are so many of them. They must cover
   three feet of the record scroll, and I have to stop for long periods to
   untangle them.

   My head is weak from thirst, suffocation, and exhaustion, and I cannot
   understand all I have set down. Those damnable green things keep staring
   and laughing with their tentacles, and sometimes they gesticulate in a way
   that makes me think they share some terrible joke just beyond my
   perception.

   It was three o'clock when I really struck my stride. There was a doorway
   which, according to my notes, I had not traversed before; and when I tried
   it I found I could crawl circuitously toward the weed-twined skeleton. The
   route was a sort of spiral, much like that by which I had first reached
   the central chamber. Whenever I came to a lateral doorway or junction I
   would keep to the course which seemed best to repeat that original
   journey. As I circled nearer and nearer to my gruesome landmark, the
   watchers outside intensified their cryptic gesticulations and sardonic
   silent laughter. Evidently they saw something grimly amusing in my
   progress - perceiving no doubt how helpless I would be in any encounter
   with them. I was content to leave them to their mirth; for although I
   realized my extreme weakness, I counted on the flame pistol and its
   numerous extra magazines to get me through the vile reptilian phalanx.

   Hope now soared high, but I did not attempt to rise to my feet. Better
   crawl now, and save my strength for the coming encounter with the
   man-lizards. My advance was very slow, and the danger of straying into
   some blind alley very great, but nonetheless I seemed to curve steadily
   toward my osseous goal. The prospect gave me new strength, and for the
   nonce I ceased to worry about my pain, my thirst, and my scant supply of
   cubes. The creatures were now all massing around the entrance - gesturing,
   leaping, and laughing with their tentacles. Soon, I reflected, I would
   have to face the entire horde - and perhaps such reinforcements as they
   would receive from the forest.

   I am now only a few yards from the skeleton, and am pausing to make this
   entry before emerging and breaking through the noxious band of entities. I
   feel confident that with my last ounce of strength I can put them to
   flight despite their numbers, for the range of this pistol is tremendous.
   Then a camp on the dry moss at the plateau's edge, and in the morning a
   weary trip through the jungle to Terra Nova. I shall be glad to see living
   men and the buildings of human beings again. The teeth of that skull gleam
   and grin horribly.

                             TOWARD NIGHT - VI, I 5

   Horror and despair. Baffled again! After making the previous entry I
   approached still closer to the skeleton, but suddenly encountered an
   intervening wall. I had been deceived once more, and was apparently back
   where I had been three days before, on my first futile attempt to leave
   the labyrinth. Whether I screamed aloud I do not know - perhaps I was too
   weak to utter a sound. I merely lay dazed in the mud for a long period,
   while the greenish things outside leaped and laughed and gestured.

   After a time I became more fully conscious. My thirst and weakness and
   suffocation were fast gaining on me, and with my last bit of strength I
   put a new cube in the electrolyser - recklessly, and without regard for
   the needs of my journey to Terra Nova. The fresh oxygen revived me
   slightly, and enabled me to look about more alertly.

   It seemed as if I were slightly more distant from poor Dwight than I had
   been at that first disappointment, and I dully wondered if I could be in
   some other corridor a trifle more remote. With this faint shadow of hope I
   laboriously dragged myself forward - but after a few feet encountered a
   dead end as I had on the former occasion.

   This, then, was the end. Three days had taken me nowhere, and my strength
   was gone. I would soon go mad from thirst, and I could no longer count on
   cubes enough to get me back. I feebly wondered why the nightmare things
   had gathered so thickly around the entrance as they mocked me. Probably
   this was part of the mockery - to make me think I was approaching an
   egress which they knew did not exist.

   I shall not last long, though I am resolved not to hasten matters as
   Dwight did. His grinning skull has just turned toward me, shifted by the
   groping of one of the efjeh-weeds that are devouring his leather suit. The
   ghoulish stare of those empty eye-sockets is worse than the staring of
   those lizard horrors. It lends a hideous meaning to that dead,
   white-toothed grin.

   I shall lie very still in the mud and save all the strength I can. This
   record - which I hope may reach and warn those who come after me - will
   soon be done. After I stop writing I shall rest a long while. Then, when
   it is too dark for those frightful creatures to see, I shall muster up my
   last reserves of strength and try to toss the record scroll over the wall
   and the intervening corridor to the plain outside. I shall take care to
   send it toward the left, where it will not hit the leaping band of mocking
   beleaguers. Perhaps it will be lost forever in the thin mud - but perhaps
   it will land in some widespread clump of weeds and ultimately reach the
   hands of men.

   If it does survive to be read, I hope it may do more than merely warn men
   of this trap. I hope it may teach our race to let those shining crystals
   stay where they are. They belong to Venus alone. Our planet does not truly
   need them, and I believe we have violated some obscure and mysterious law
   - some law buried deep in the arcane of the cosmos - in our attempts to
   take them. Who can tell what dark, potent, and widespread forces spur on
   these reptilian things who guard their treasure so strangely? Dwight and I
   have paid, as others have paid and will pay. But it may be that these
   scattered deaths are only the prelude of greater horrors to come. Let us
   leave to Venus that which belongs only to Venus.

   I am very near death now, and fear I may not be able to throw the scroll
   when dusk comes. If I cannot, I suppose the man-lizards will seize it, for
   they will probably realize what it is. They will not wish anyone to be
   warned of the labyrinth - and they will not know that my message holds a
   plea in their own behalf. As the end approaches I feel more kindly towards
   the things. In the scale of cosmic entity who can say which species stands
   higher, or more nearly approaches a space-wide organic norm - theirs or
   mine?

   I have just taken the great crystal out of my pouch to look at in my last
   moments. It shines fiercely and menacingly in the red rays of the dying
   day. The leaping horde have noticed it, and their gestures have changed in
   a way I cannot understand. I wonder why they keep clustered around the
   entrance instead of concentrating at a still closer point in the
   transparent wall.

   I am growing numb and cannot write much more. Things whirl around me, yet
   I do not lose consciousness. Can I throw this over the wall? That crystal
   glows so, yet the twilight is deepening.

   Dark. Very weak. They are still laughing and leaping around the doorway,
   and have started those hellish glow-torches.

   Are they going away? I dreamed I heard a sound... light in the sky.

          REPORT OF WESLEY P. MILLER, SUPT. GROUP A, VENUS CRYSTAL CO.

                         (TERRA NOVA ON VENUS - Vl, 16)

   Our Operative A-49, Kenton J. Stanfield of 5317 Marshall Street, Richmond,
   Va., left Terra Nova early on VI, 12, for a short-term trip indicated by
   detector. Due back 13th or 14th. Did not appear by evening of 15th, so
   Scouting Plane FR-58 with five men under my command set out at 8 P.M. to
   follow route with detector. Needle showed no change from earlier readings.

   Followed needle to Erycinian Highland, played strong searchlights all the
   way. Triple-range flame-guns and D-radiation cylinders could have
   dispersed any ordinary hostile force of natives, or any dangerous
   aggregation of carnivorous skorahs.

   When over the open plain on Eryx we saw a group of moving lights which we
   knew were native glow-torches. As we approached, they scattered into the
   forest. Probably seventy-five to a hundred in all. Detector indicated
   crystal on spot where they had been. Sailing low over this spot, our
   lights picked out objects on the ground. Skeleton tangled in efjeh-weeds,
   and complete body ten feet from it. Brought plane down near bodies, and
   corner of wing crashed on unseen obstruction.

   Approaching bodies on foot, we came up short against a smooth, invisible
   barrier which puzzled us enormously. Feeling along it near the skeleton,
   we struck an opening, beyond which was a space with another opening
   leading to the skeleton. The latter, though robbed of clothing by weeds,
   had one of the company's numbered metal helmets beside it. It was
   Operative B-9, Frederick N. Dwight of Koenig's division, who had been out
   of Terra Nova for two months on a long commission.

   Between this skeleton and the complete body there seemed to be another
   wall, but we could easily identify the second man as Stanfield. He had a
   record scroll in his left hand and a pen in his right, and seemed to have
   been writing when he died. No crystal was visible, but the detector
   indicated a huge specimen near Stanfield's body.

   We had great difficulty in getting at Stanfield, but finally succeeded.
   The body was still warm, and a great crystal lay beside it, covered by the
   shallow mud. We at once studied the record scroll in the left hand, and
   prepared to take certain steps based on its data. The contents of the
   scroll forms the long narrative prefixed to this report; a narrative whose
   main descriptions we have verified, and which we append as an explanation
   of what was found. The later parts of this account show mental decay, but
   there is no reason to doubt the bulk of it. Stanfield obviously died of a
   combination of thirst, suffocation, cardiac strain, and psychological
   depression. His mask was in place, and freely generating oxygen despite an
   alarmingly low cube supply.

   Our plane being damaged, we sent a wireless and called out Anderson with
   Repair Plane PG-7, a crew of wreckers, and a set of blasting materials. By
   morning FH-58 was fixed, and went back under Anderson carrying the two
   bodies and the crystal. We shall bury Dwight and Stanfield in the company
   graveyard, and ship the crystal to Chicago on the next earth-bound liner.
   Later, we shall adopt Stanfield's suggestion - the sound one in the saner,
   earlier part of his report - and bring across enough troops to wipe out
   the natives altogether. With a clear field, there can be scarcely any
   limit to the amount of crystal we can secure.

   In the afternoon we studied the invisible building or trap with great
   care, exploring it with the aid of long guiding cords, and preparing a
   complete chart for our archives. We were much impressed by the design, and
   shall keep specimens of the substance for chemical analysis. All such
   knowledge will be useful when we take over the various cities of the
   natives. Our type C diamond drills were able to bite into the unseen
   material, and wreckers are now planting dynamite preparatory to a thorough
   blasting. Nothing will be left when we are done. The edifice forms a
   distinct menace to aerial and other possible traffic.

   In considering the plan of the labyrinth one is impressed not only with
   the irony of Dwight's fate, but with that of Stanfield as well. When
   trying to reach the second body from the skeleton, we could find no access
   on the right, but Markheim found a doorway from the first inner space some
   fifteen feet past Dwight and four or five past Stanfield. Beyond this was
   a long hall which we did not explore till later, but on the right-hand
   side of that hall was another doorway leading directly to the body.
   Stanfield could have reached the outside entrance by walking twenty-two or
   twenty-three feet if he had found the opening which lay directly behind
   him - an opening which he overlooked in his exhaustion and despair.

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

   The Lovecraft Library wishes to extend its gratitude to Eulogio Garcia
   Recalde for transcribing this text.
