The Green Meadow

  by H. P. Lovecraft and Winifred V. Jackson

                                Written 1918/19

                Published Spring 1927 in The Vagrant, p. 188-95

   (INTRODUCTORY NOTE: The following very singular narrative, or record of
   impressions, was discovered under circumstances so extraordinary that they
   deserve careful description. On the evening of Wednesday, August 27, 1913,
   at about eight-thirty o'clock, the population of the small seaside village
   of Potowonket, Maine, U.S.A., was aroused by a thunderous report
   accompanied by a blinding flash; and persons near the shore beheld a
   mammoth ball of fire dart from the heavens into the sea but a short
   distance out, sending up a prodigious column of water. The following
   Sunday a fishing party composed of John Richmond, Peter B. Carr, and Simon
   Canfield, caught in their trawl and dragged ashore a mass of metallic
   rock, weighing 360 pounds, and looking (as Mr. Canfield said) like a piece
   of slag. Most of the inhabitants agreed that this heavy body was none
   other than the fireball which had fallen from the sky four days before;
   and Dr. Richard M. Jones, the local scientific authority, allowed that it
   must be an aerolite or meteoric stone. In chipping off specimens to send
   to an expert Boston analyst, Dr. Jones discovered imbedded in the
   semi-metallic mass the strange book containing the ensuing tale, which is
   still in his possession.

   In form the discovery resembles an ordinary note-book, about 5 X 3 inches
   in size, and containing thirty leaves. In material, however it presents
   marked peculiarities. The covers are apparently of some dark stony
   substance unknown to geologists, and unbreakable by any mechanical means.
   No chemical reagent seems to act upon them. The leaves are much the same,
   save that they are lighter in colour, and so infinitely thin as to be
   quite flexible. The whole is bound by some process not very clear to those
   who have observed it; a process involving the adhesion of the leaf
   substance to the cover substance. These substances cannot now be
   separated, nor can the leaves be torn by any amount of force. The writing
   is Greek of the purest classical quality, and several students of
   palaeography declare that the characters are in a cursive hand used about
   the second century B. C. There is little in the text to determine the
   date. The mechanical mode of writing cannot be deduced beyond the fact
   that it must have resembled that of the modern slate and slate-pencil.
   During the course of analytical efforts made by the late Professor
   Chambers of Harvard, several pages, mostly at the conclusion of the
   narrative, were blurred to the point of utter effacement before being
   read; a circumstance forming a well-nigh irreparable loss. What remains of
   the contents was done into modem Greek letters by the palaeographer,
   Rutherford, and in this form submitted to the translators.

   Professor Mayfield of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who
   examined samples of the strange stone, declares it a true meteorite; an
   opinion in which Dr. von Winterfeldt of Heidelberg (interned in 1918 as a
   dangerous enemy alien) does not concur. Professor Bradley of Columbia
   College adopts a less dogmatic ground; pointing out that certain utterly
   unknown ingredients are present in large quantities, and warning that no
   classification is as yet possible.

   The presence, nature, and message of the strange book form so momentous a
   problem, that no explanation can even be attempted. The text, as far as
   preserved, is here rendered as literally as our language permits, in the
   hope that some reader may eventually hit upon an interpretation and solve
   one of the greatest scientific mysteries of recent years.)

     It was a narrow place, and I was alone. On one side, beyond a margin of
     vivid waving green, was the sea; blue; bright, and billowy, and send-ing
     up vaporous exhalations which intoxicated me. So profuse, indeed, were
     these exhalations, that they gave me an odd impression of a coales-cence
     of sea and sky; for the heavens were likewise bright and blue. On the
     other side was the forest, ancient almost as the sea itself, and
     stretch-ing infinitely inland. It was very dark, for the trees were
     grotesquely huge and luxuriant, and incredibly numerous. Their giant
     trunks were of a horrible green which blended weirdly with the narrow
     green tract whereon I stood. At some distance away, on either side of
     me, the strange forest extended down to the water's edge, obliterating
     the shore line and completely hemming in the narrow tract. Some of the
     trees, I observed, stood in the water itself; as though impatient of any
     barrier to their progress.

     I saw no living thing, nor sign that any living thing save myself had
     ever existed. The sea and the sky and the wood encircled me, and reached
     off into regions beyond my imagination. Nor was there any sound save of
     the wind-tossed wood and of the sea.

     As I stood in this silent place, I suddenly commenced to tremble; for
     though I knew not how I came there, and could scarce remember what my
     name and rank had been, I felt that I should go mad if I could
     understand what lurked about me. I recalled things I had learned, things
     I had dreamed, things I had imagined and yearned for in some other
     distant life. I thought of long nights when I had gazed up at the stars
     of heaven and cursed the gods that my free soul could not traverse the
     vast abysses which were inaccessible to my body. I conjured up ancient
     blasphemies, and terrible delvings into the papri of Democritus; but as
     memories appeared, I shuddered in deeper fear, for I knew that I was
     alone - horribly alone. Alone, yet dose to sentient impulses of vast,
     vague kind; which I prayed never to comprehend nor encounter. In the
     voice of the swaying green branches I fancied I could detect a kind of
     malignant hatred and demoniac triumph. Sometimes they struck me as being
     in horrible colloquy with ghastly and unthinkable things which the scaly
     green bodies of the trees half-hid; hid from sight but not from
     consciousness. The most oppressive of my sensations was a sinister
     feeling of alienage. Though I saw about me objects which I could name;
     trees, grass, sea, and sky; I felt that their relation to me was not the
     same as that of the trees, grass, sea, and sky I knew in another and
     dimly remembered life. The nature of the difference I could not tell,
     yet I shook in stark fright as it impressed itself upon me.

     And then, in a spot where I had before discerned nothing but the misty
     sea, I beheld the Green Meadow; separated from me by a vast expanse of
     blue rippling water with suntipped wavelets, yet strangely near. Often I
     would peep fearfully over my right shoulder at the trees, but I
     preferred to look at the Green Meadow, which affected me oddly.

     It was while my eyes were fixed upon this singular tract, that I first
     felt the ground in motion beneath me. Beginning with a kind of throbbing
     agitation which held a fiendish suggestion of conscious action, the bit
     of bank on which I stood detached itself from the grassy shore and
     commenced to float away; borne slowly onward as if by some current of
     resistless force. I did not move, astonished and startled as I was by
     the unprecedented phenomenon; but stood rigidly still until a wide lane
     of water yawned betwixt me and the land of trees. Then I sat down in a
     sort of daze, and again looked at the sun-tipped water and the Green
     Meadow.

     Behind me the trees and the things they may have been hiding seemed to
     radiate infinite menace. This I knew without turning to view them, for
     as I grew more used to the scene I became less and less depen-dent upon
     the five senses that once had been my sole reliance. I knew the green
     scaly forest hated me, yet now I was safe from it, for my bit of bank
     had drifted far from the shore.

     But though one peril was past, another loomed up before me. Pieces of
     earth were constantly crumbling from the floating isle which held me, so
     that death could not be far distant in any event. Yet even then I seemed
     to sense that death would be death to me no more, for I turned again to
     watch the Green Meadow, imbued with a curious feeling of security in
     strange contrast to my general horror.

     Then it was that I heard, at a distance immeasurable, the sound of
     falling water. Not that of any trival cascade such as I had known, but
     that which might be heard in the far Scythian lands if all the
     Mediterranean were poured down an unfathomable abyss. It was toward this
     sound that my shrinking island was drifting, yet I was content.

     Far in the rear were happening weird and terrible things; things which I
     turned to view, yet shivered to behold. For in the sky dark vaporous
     forms hovered fantastically, brooding over trees and seeming to answer
     the challenge of the waving green branches. Then a thick mist arose from
     the sea to join the sky-forms, and the shore was erased from my sight.
     Though the sun - what sun I knew not - shone brightly on the water
     around me, the land I had left seemed involved in a demoniac tempest
     where dashed the will of the hellish trees and what they hid, with that
     of the sky and the sea. And when the mist vanished, I saw only the blue
     sky and the blue sea, for the land and the trees were no more.

     It was at this point that my attention was arrested by the singing in
     the Green Meadow. Hitherto, as I have said, I had encountered no sign of
     human life; but now there arose to my ears a dull chant whose origin and
     nature were apparently unmistakable. While the words were utterly
     undistinguishable, the chant awaked in me a peculiar train of
     associations; and I was reminded of some vaguely disquieting lines I had
     once translated out of an Egyptian book, which in turn were taken from a
     papyrus of ancient Meroe. Through my brain ran lines that I fear to
     repeat; lines telling of very antique things and forms of life in the
     days when our earth was exceeding young. Of things which thought and
     moved and were alive, yet which gods and men would not consider alive.
     It was a strange book.

     As I listened, I became gradually conscious of a circumstance which had
     before puzzled me only subconsciously. At no time had my sight
     distinguished any definite objects in the Green Meadow, an impression of
     vivid homogeneous verdure being the sum total of my perception. Now,
     however, I saw that the current would cause my island to pass the shore
     at but a little distance; so that I might learn more of the land and of
     the singing thereon. My curiosity to behold the singers had mounted
     high, though it was mingled with apprehension.

     Bits of sod continued to break away from the tiny tract which carried
     me, but I heeded not their loss; for I felt that I was not to die with
     the body (or appearance of a body) which I seemed to possess. That
     everything about me, even life and death, was illusory; that I had
     overleaped the bounds of mortality and corporeal entity, becoming a
     free, detached thing; impressed me as almost certain. Of my location I
     knew nothing, save that I felt I could not be on the earth-planet once
     so familiar to me. My sensations, apart from a kind of haunting terror,
     were those of a traveller just embarked upon an unending voyage of
     discovery. For a moment I thought of the lands and persons I had left
     behind; and of strange ways whereby I might some day tell them of my
     adventurings, even though I might never return.

     I had now floated very near the Green Meadow, so that the voices were
     clear and distinct; but though I knew many languages I could not quite
     interpret the words of the chanting. Familiar they indeed were, as I had
     subtly felt when at a greater distance, but beyond a sensation of vague
     and awesome remembrance I could make nothing of them. A most
     extraordinary quality in the voices-a quality which I cannot describe-at
     once frightened and fascinated me. My eyes could now discern several
     things amidst the omnipresent verdure-rocks, covered with I bright green
     moss, shrubs of considerable height, and less definable shapes of great
     magnitude which seemed to move or vibrate amidst the shrubbery in a
     peculiar way. The chanting, whose authors I was so anxious to glimpse,
     seemed loudest, at points where these shapes were most numerous and most
     vigorously in motion.

     And then, as my island drifted closer and the sound of the distant
     waterfall grew louder, I saw clearly the source of the chanting, and in
     one horrible instant remembered everything. Of such things I cannot,
     dare not tell, for therein was revealed the hideous solution of all
     which had puzzled me; and that solution would drive you mad, even as it
     al-most drove me.... I knew now the change through which I had passed,
     and through which certain others who once were men had passed! and I
     knew the endless cycle of the future which none like me may escape... I
     shall live forever, be conscious forever, though my soul cries out to
     the gods for the boon of death and oblivion... All is before me: beyond
     the deafening torrent lies the land of Stethelos, where young men are
     infinitely old... The Green Meadow... I will send a message across the
     horrible immeasurable abyss....

   (At this point the text becomes illegible.)

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

   Scanned by Eulogio Garcia Recalde for "The H. P. Lovecraft Library"
