History of the Necronomicon

  by H.P. Lovecraft

                                  Written 1927

                                 Published 1938

   Original title Al Azif -- azif being the word used by Arabs to designate
   that nocturnal sound (made by insects) suppos'd to be the howling of
   daemons.

   Composed by Abdul Alhazred, a mad poet of Sanaa, in Yemen, who is said to
   have flourished during the period of the Ommiade caliphs, circa 700 A.D.
   He visited the ruins of Babylon and the subterranean secrets of Memphis
   and spent ten years alone in the great southern desert of Arabia -- the
   Roba el Khaliyeh or "Empty Space" of the ancients -- and "Dahna" or
   "Crimson" desert of the modern Arabs, which is held to be inhabited by
   protective evil spirits and monsters of death. Of this desert many strange
   and unbelievable marvels are told by those who pretend to have penetrated
   it. In his last years Alhazred dwelt in Damascus, where the Necronomicon
   (Al Azif) was written, and of his final death or disappearance (738 A.D.)
   many terrible and conflicting things are told. He is said by Ebn Khallikan
   (12th cent. biographer) to have been seized by an invisible monster in
   broad daylight and devoured horribly before a large number of
   fright-frozen witnesses. Of his madness many things are told. He claimed
   to have seen fabulous Irem, or City of Pillars, and to have found beneath
   the ruins of a certain nameless desert town the shocking annals and
   secrets of a race older than mankind. He was only an indifferent Moslem,
   worshipping unknown entities whom he called Yog-Sothoth and Cthulhu.

   In A.D. 950 the Azif, which had gained a considerable tho' surreptitious
   circulation amongst the philosophers of the age, was secretly translated
   into Greek by Theodorus Philetas of Constantinople under the title
   Necronomicon. For a century it impelled certain experimenters to terrible
   attempts, when it was suppressed and burnt by the patriarch Michael. After
   this it is only heard of furtively, but (1228) Olaus Wormius made a Latin
   translation later in the Middle Ages, and the Latin text was printed twice
   -- once in the fifteenth century in black-letter (evidently in Germany)
   and once in the seventeenth (prob. Spanish) -- both editions being without
   identifying marks, and located as to time and place by internal
   typographical evidence only. The work both Latin and Greek was banned by
   Pope Gregory IX in 1232, shortly after its Latin translation, which called
   attention to it. The Arabic original was lost as early as Wormius' time,
   as indicated by his prefatory note; and no sight of the Greek copy --
   which was printed in Italy between 1500 and 1550 -- has been reported
   since the burning of a certain Salem man's library in 1692. An English
   translation made by Dr. Dee was never printed, and exists only in
   fragments recovered from the original manuscript. Of the Latin texts now
   existing one (15th cent.) is known to be in the British Museum under lock
   and key, while another (17th cent.) is in the Bibliotheque Nationale at
   Paris. A seventeenth-century edition is in the Widener Library at Harvard,
   and in the library of Miskatonic University at Arkham. Also in the library
   of the University of Buenos Ayres. Numerous other copies probably exist in
   secret, and a fifteenth-century one is persistently rumoured to form part
   of the collection of a celebrated American millionaire. A still vaguer
   rumour credits the preservation of a sixteenth-century Greek text in the
   Salem family of Pickman; but if it was so preserved, it vanished with the
   artist R. U. Pickman, who disappeared early in 1926. The book is rigidly
   suppressed by the authorities of most countries, and by all branches of
   organised ecclesiasticism. Reading leads to terrible consequences. It was
   from rumours of this book (of which relatively few of the general public
   know) that R. W. Chambers is said to have derived the idea of his early
   novel The King in Yellow.

                                   Chronology
  * Al Azif written circa 730 A.D. at Damascus by Abdul Alhazred
  * Tr. to Greek 950 A.D. as Necronomicon by Theodorus Philetas
  * Burnt by Patriarch Michael 1050 (i.e., Greek text). Arabic text now lost.
  * Olaus translates Gr. to Latin 1228
  * 1232 Latin ed. (and Gr.) suppr. by Pope Gregory IX
  * 14... Black-letter printed edition (Germany)
  * 15... Gr. text printed in Italy
  * 16... Spanish reprint of Latin text

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

   This should be supplemented with a letter written to Clark Ashton Smith on
   November 27, 1927:

     I have had no chance to produce new material this autumn, but have been
     classifying notes & synopses in preparation for some monstrous tales
     later on. In particular I have drawn up some data on the celebrated &
     unmentionable Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred! It seems that
     this shocking blasphemy was produced by a native of Sanaa, in Yemen, who
     flourished about 700 A.D. & made many mysterious pilgrimages to
     Babylon's ruins, Memphis's catacombs, & the devil-haunted & untrodden
     wastes of the great southern deserts of Arabia -- the Roba el Khaliyeh,
     where he claimed to have found records of things older than mankind, &
     to have learnt the worship of Yog-Sothoth & Cthulhu. The book was a
     product of Abdul's old age, which was spent in Damascus, & the original
     title was Al Azif -- azif (cf. Henley's notes to Vathek) being the name
     applied to those strange night noises (of insects) which the Arabs
     attribute to the howling of daemons. Alhazred died -- or disappeared --
     under terrible circumstances in the year 738. In 950 Al Azif was
     translated into Greek by the Byzantine Theodorus Philetas under the
     title Necronomicon, & a century later it was burnt at the order of
     Michael, Patriarch of Constantinople. It was translated into Latin by
     Olaus in 1228, but placed on the Index Expurgatorius by Pope Gregory IX
     in 1232. The original Arabic was lost before Olaus' time, & the last
     known Greek copy perished in Salem in 1692. The work was printed in the
     15th, 16th, & 17th centuries, but few copies are extant. Wherever
     existing, it is carefully guarded for the sake of the world's welfare &
     sanity. Once a man read through the copy in the library of Miskatonic
     University at Arkham -- read it through & fled wild-eyed into the
     hills... but that is another story!

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

   In yet another letter (to James Blish and William Miller, 1936), Lovecraft
   says:

     You are fortunate in securing copies of the hellish and abhorred
     Necronomicon. Are they the Latin texts printed in Germany in the
     fifteenth century, or the Greek version printed in Italy in 1567, or the
     Spanish translation of 1623? Or do these copies represent different
     texts?
