Ibid

  by H. P. Lovecraft

   "...as Ibid says in his famous Lives of the Poets."

                                                      - From a student theme.

   The erroneous idea that Ibid is the author of the Lives is so frequently
   met with, even among those pretending to a degree of culture, that it is
   worth correcting. It should be a matter of general knowledge that Cf. is
   responsible for this work. Ibid's masterpiece, on the other hand, was the
   famous Op. Cit. wherein all the significant undercurrents of Graeco-Roman
   expression were crystallised once for all - and with admirable acuteness,
   notwithstanding the surprisingly late date at which Ibid wrote. There is a
   false report - very commonly reproduced in modern books prior to Von
   Schweinkopf's monumental Geschichte der Ostrogothen in Italien - that Ibid
   was a Romanised Visigoth of Ataulf's horde who settled in Placentia about
   410 A. D. The contrary cannot be too strongly emphasised; for Von
   Schweinkopf, and since his time Littlewit1 and Betenoir,2 have shewn with
   irrefutable force that this strikingly isolated figure was a genuine Roman
   - or at least as genuine a Roman as that degenerate and mongrelised age
   could produce - of whom one might well say what Gibbon said of Boethius,
   "that he was the last whom Cato or Tully could have acknowledged for their
   countryman." He was, like Boethius and nearly all the eminent men of his
   age, of the great Anician family, and traced his genealogy with much
   exactitude and self-satisfaction to all the heroes of the republic. His
   full name - long and pompous according to the custom of an age which had
   lost the trinomial simplicity of classic Roman nomenclature - is stated by
   Von Schweinkopf3 to have been Caius Anicius Magnus Furius Camillus
   Aemilianus Cornelius Valerius Pompeius Julius Ibidus; though Littlewit4
   rejects Aemilianus and adds Claudius Deciusfunianus; whilst Betenoir5
   differs radically, giving the full name as Magnus Furius Camillus Aurelius
   Antoninus Flavius Anicius Petronius Valentinianus Aegidus Ibidus.

   The eminent critic and biographer was born in the year 486, shortly after
   the extinction of the Roman rule in Gaul by Clovis. Rome and Ravenna are
   rivals for the honour of his birth, though it is certain that he received
   his rhetorical and philosophical training in the schools of Athens - the
   extent of whose suppression by Theodosius a century before is grossly
   exaggerated by the superficial. In 512, under the benign rule of the
   Ostrogoth Theodoric, we behold him as a teacher of rhetoric at Rome, and
   in 516 he held the consulship together with Pompilius Numantius Bombastes
   Marcellinus Deodamnatus. Upon the death of Theodoric in 526, Ibidus
   retired from public life to compose his celebrated work (whose pure
   Ciceronian style is as remarkable a case of classic atavism as is the
   verse of Claudius Claudianus, who flourished a century before Ibidus); but
   he was later recalled to scenes of pomp to act as court rhetorician for
   Theodatus, nephew of Theodoric.

   Upon the usurpation of Vitiges, Ibidus fell into disgrace and was for a
   time imprisoned; but the coming of the Byzantine-Roman army under
   Belisarius soon restored him to liberty and honours. Throughout the siege
   of Rome he served bravely in the army of the defenders, and afterward
   followed the eagles of Belisarius to Alba, Porto, and Centumcellae. After
   the Frankish siege of Milan, Ibidus was chosen to accompany the learned
   Bishop Datius to Greece, and resided with him at Corinth in the year 539.
   About 541 he removed to Constantinopolis, where he received every mark of
   imperial favour both from Justinianus and Justinus the Second. The
   Emperors Tiberius and Maurice did kindly honour to his old age, and
   contributed much to his immortality - especially Maurice, whose delight it
   was to trace his ancestry to old Rome notwithstanding his birth at
   Arabiscus, in Cappadocia. It was Maurice who, in the poet's 101st year,
   secured the adoption of his work as a textbook in the schools of the
   empire, an honour which proved a fatal tax on the aged rhetorician's
   emotions, since he passed away peacefully at his home near the church of
   St. Sophia on the sixth day before the Kalends of September, A. D. 587, in
   the 102nd year of his age.

   His remains, notwithstanding the troubled state of Italy, were taken to
   Ravenna for interment; but being interred in the suburb of Classe, were
   exhumed and ridiculed by the Lombard Duke of Spoleto, who took his skull
   to King Autharis for use as a wassail-bowl. Ibid's skull was proudly
   handed down from king to king of the Lombard line. Upon the capture of
   Pavia by Charlemagne in 774, the skull was seized from the tottering
   Desiderius and carried in the train of the Frankish conqueror. It was from
   this vessel, indeed, that Pope Leo administered the royal unction which
   made of the hero-nomad a Holy Roman Emperor. Charlemagne took Ibid's skull
   to his capital at Aix, soon after- ward presenting it to his Saxon teacher
   Alcuin, upon whose death in 804 it was sent to Alcuin's kinsfolk in
   England.

   William the Conqueror, finding it in an abbey niche where the pious family
   of Alcuin had placed it (believing it to be the skull of a saint6 who had
   miraculously annihilated the Lombards by his prayers), did reverence to
   its osseous antiquity; and even the rough soldiers of Cromwell, upon
   destroying Ballylough Abbey in Ireland in 1650 (it having been secretly
   transported thither by a devout Papist in 1539, upon Henry VII's
   dissolution of the English monasteries), declined to offer violence to a
   relic so venerable.

   It was captured by the private soldier Read-'em-and-Weep Hopkins, who not
   long after traded it to Rest-in-Jehovah Stubbs for a quid of new Virginia
   weed. Stubbs, upon sending forth his son Zerubbabel to seek his fortune in
   New England in 1661 (for he thought ill of the Restoration atmosphere for
   a pious young yeoman), gave him St. Ibid's - or rather Brother Ibid's, for
   he abhorred all that was Popish - skull as a talisman. Upon landing in
   Salem Zerubbabel set it up in his cupboard beside the chimney, he having
   built a modest house near the town pump. However, he had not been wholly
   unaffected by the Restoration influence; and having become addicted to
   gaming, lost the skull to one Epenetus Dexter, a visiting freeman of
   Providence.

   It was in the house of Dexter, in the northern part of the town near the
   present intersection of North Main and Olney Streets, on the occasion of
   Canonchet's raid of March 30, 1676, during King Philip's War; and the
   astute sachem, recognising it at once as a thing of singular venerableness
   and dignity, sent it as a symbol of alliance to a faction of the Pequots
   in Connecticut with whom he was negotiating. On April 4 he was captured by
   the colonists and soon after executed, but the austere head of Ibid
   continued on its wanderings.

   The Pequots, enfeebled by a previous war, could give the now stricken
   Narragansetts no assistance; and in 1680 a Dutch furtrader of Albany,
   Petrus van Schaack, secured the distinguished cranium for the modest sum
   of two guilders, he having recognised its value from the half-effaced
   inscription carved in Lombardic minuscules (palaeography, it might be
   explained, was one of the leading accomplishments of New-Netherland
   fur-traders of the seventeenth century).

   From van Schaack, sad to say, the relic was stolen in 1683 by a French
   trader, Jean Grenier, whose Popish zeal recognised the features of one
   whom he had been taught at his mother's knee to revere as St. Ibide.
   Grenier, fired with virtuous rage at the possession of this holy symbol by
   a Protestant, crushed van Schaack's head one night with an axe and escaped
   to the north with his booty; soon, however, being robbed and slain by the
   half-breed voyageur Michel Savard, who took the skull - despite the
   illiteracy which prevented his recognising it - to add to a collection of
   similar but more recent material.

   Upon his death in 1701 his half-breed son Pierre traded it among other
   things to some emissaries of the Sacs and Foxes, and it was found outside
   the chief's tepee a generation later by Charles de Langlade, founder of
   the trading post at Green Bay, Wisconsin. De Langlade regarded this sacred
   object with proper veneration and ransomed it at the expense of many glass
   beads; yet after his time it found itself in many other hands, being
   traded to settlements at the head of Lake Winnebago, to tribes around Lake
   Mendota, and finally, early in the nineteenth century, to one Solomon
   Juneau, a Frenchman, at the new trading post of Milwaukee on the Menominee
   River and the shore of Lake Michigan.

   Later traded to Jacques Caboche, another settler, it was in 1850 lost in a
   game of chess or poker to a newcomer named Hans Zimmerman; being used by
   him as a beer-stein until one day, under the spell of its contents, he
   suffered it to roll from his front stoop to the prairie path before his
   home - where, falling into the burrow of a prairie-dog, it passed beyond
   his power of discovery or recovery upon his awaking.

   So for generations did the sainted skull of Caius Anicius Magnus Furius
   Camillus Aemilianus Cornelius Valerius Pompeius Julius Ibidus, consul of
   Rome, favourite of emperors, and saint of the Romish church, lie hidden
   beneath the soil of a growing town. At first worshipped with dark rites by
   the prairie-dogs, who saw in it a deity sent from the upper world, it
   afterward fell into dire neglect as the race of simple, artless burrowers
   succumbed before the onslaught of the conquering Aryan. Sewers came, but
   they passed by it. Houses went up - 2303 of them, and more - and at last
   one fateful night a titan thing occurred. Subtle Nature, convulsed with a
   spiritual ecstasy, like the froth of that region's quondam beverage, laid
   low the lofty and heaved high the humble - and behold! In the roseal dawn
   the burghers of Milwaukee rose to find a former prairie turned to a
   highland! Vast and far-reaching was the great upheaval. Subterrene arcana,
   hidden for years, came at last to the light. For there, full in the rifted
   roadway, lay bleached and tranquil in bland, saintly, and consular pomp
   the dome-like skull of Ibid!

                                    [Notes]

   1 Rome and Byzantium: A Study in Survival (Waukesha, 1869), Vol. XX, p.
   598.
   2 Influences Romains clans le Moyen Age (Fond du Lac, 1877), Vol. XV, p.
   720.
   3Following Procopius, Goth. x.y.z.
   4Following Jornandes, Codex Murat. xxj. 4144.
   5After Pagi, 50-50.
   6Not till the appearance of von Schweinkopf's work in 1797 were St. Ibid
   and the rhetorician properly re-identified.
