Metrical Regularity

  by H.P. Lovecraft

                  "Deteriores omnus sumus licentia." - Terence

   Of the various forms of decadence manifest in the poetical art of the
   present age, none strikes more harshly on our sensibilities than the
   alarming decline in that harmonious regularity of metre which adorned the
   poetry of our immediate ancestors.

   That metre itself forms an essential part of all true poetry is a
   principle which not even the assertions of an Aristotle or the
   pronouncements of a Plato can disestablish. As old a critic as Dionysius
   of Halicarnassus and as modern an philosopher as Hegel have each affirmed
   that versification in poetry is not alone a necessary attribute, but the
   very foundation as well; Hegel, indeed, placing metre above metaphorical
   imagination as the essence of all poetic creation.

   Science can likewise trace the metrical instinct from the very infancy of
   mankind, or even beyond, to the pre-human age of the apes. Nature is in
   itself an unending succession of regular impulses. The steady recurrence
   of the seasons and of the moonlight, the coming and going of the day, the
   ebb and flow of the tides, the beating of the heart and pulses, the tread
   of the feet in walking, the countless other phenomena of like regularity,
   have all combined to inculcate in the human brain a rhythmic sense which
   is as manifest in the most uncultivated, as in the most polished of
   peoples. Metre, therefore, is no such false artifice as most exponents of
   radicalism would have us believe, but is instead a natural and inevitable
   embellishment to poesy, which succeeding ages should develop and refine,
   rather than maim or destroy.

   Like other instincts, the metric sense has taken on different aspects
   among different races. Savages show it in its simplest form while dancing
   to the sound of primitive drums; barbarians display it in their religious
   and other chantings; civilized peoples utilize it for their formal poetry,
   either as measured quantity, like that of Greek and Roman verse, or as
   measured accentual stress, like that of our own English verse. Precision
   of metre is thus no mere display of meretricious ornament, but a logical
   evolution from eminently natural sources.

   It is the contention of the ultra-modern poet, as enunciated by Mrs. J. W.
   Renshaw in her recent article on "The Autocracy of Art," (The Looking
   Glass for May) that the truly inspired bard must chant forth his feelings
   independently of form or language, permitting each changing impulse to
   alter the rhythm of his lay, and blindly resigning his reason to the "fine
   frenzy" of his mood. This contention is of course founded upon the
   assumption that poetry is super-intellectual; the expression of a "soul"
   which outranks the mind and its precepts. Now while avoiding the
   impeachment of this dubious theory, we must needs remark that the laws of
   Nature cannot so easily be outdistanced. However much true poesy may
   overtop the produce of the brain, it must still be affected by natural
   laws, which are universal and inevitable. Wherefore it is the various
   clearly defined natural forms through which the emotions seek expression.
   Indeed, we feel even unconsciously the fitness of certain types of metre
   for certain types of thought, and in perusing a crude or irregular poem
   are often abruptly repelled by the unwarranted variations made by the
   bard, either through his ignorance or his perverted taste. We are
   naturally shocked at the clothing of a grave subject in anapestic metre,
   or the treatment of a long and lofty theme in short, choppy lines. This
   latter defect is what repels us so much from Coninghton's really scholarly
   translation of the Aeneid.

   What the radicals so wantonly disregard in their eccentric performances is
   unity of thought. Amidst their wildly repeated leaps from one rough metre
   to another, they ignore the underlying uniformity of each of their poems.
   Scene may change; atmosphere may vary; yet one poem cannot carry but one
   definite message, and to suit this ultimate and fundamental message but
   one metre must be selected and sustained. To accommodate the minor
   inequalities of tone in a poem, one regular metre will amply lend itself
   to diversity. Our chief but now annoyingly neglected measure, the heroic
   couplet, is capable of taking on the infinite shades of expression by the
   right selection of sequence of words, and by the proper placing of the
   caesura or pause in each line. Dr. Blair, in his 38th lecture, explains
   and illustrates with admirable perspicuity the importance of the caesura's
   location in varying the flow of heroic verse. It is also possible to lend
   variety to a poem by using very judiciously occasional feet of a metre
   different from that of the body of the work. This is generally done
   without disturbing the syllabification, and it in no way impairs or
   obscures the dominant measure.

   Most amusing of all the claims of the radical is the assertion that true
   poetic fervor can never be confined to regular metre; that the wild-eyed,
   long-haired rider of Pegasus must inflict upon a suffering public in
   unaltered form the vague conceptions which flit in noble chaos through his
   exalted soul. While it is perfectly obvious that the hour of rare
   inspiration must be improved without the hindrance of grammars or rhyming
   dictionaries, it is no less obvious that the succeeding hour of calmer
   contemplation may very profitably be devoted to amendment and polishing.
   The "language of the heart" must be clarified and made intelligible to
   other hearts, else its purport will forever be confined to its creator. If
   natural laws of metrical construction be willfully set aside, the reader's
   attention will be distracted from the soul of the poem to its uncouth and
   ill-fitting dress. The more nearly perfect the metre, the less conspicuous
   its presence; hence if the poet desires supreme consideration for his
   matter, he should make his verses so smooth that the sense may never be
   interrupted.

   The ill effect of metrical laxity on the younger generation of poets is
   enormous. These latest suitors of the Muse, not yet sufficiently trained
   to distinguish between their own artless crudities and the cultivated
   monstrosities of the educated but radical bard, come to regard with
   distrust the orthodox critics, and to believe that no grammatical,
   rhetorical, or metrical skill is necessary to their own development. The
   result cannot but be a race of churlish, cacophonous hybrids, whose
   amorphous outcries will waver uncertainly betwixt prose and verse,
   absorbing the vices of both and the virtues of neither.

   When proper consideration shall be taken of the perfect naturalness of
   polished metre, a wholesome reaction against the present chaos must
   inevitably occur; so that the few remaining disciples of conservatism and
   good taste may justly entertain one last, lingering hope of hearing from
   modern lyres the stately heroics of Pope, the majestic blank verse of
   Thomson, the terse octosyllabics of Swift, the sonorous quatrains of Gray,
   and the lively anapests of Sheridan and Moore.

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------
