The Mysteriovs Ship

  by H. P. Lovecraft

                                  Written 1902

                                   Chapter 1.

   In the spring of 1847, the little village of Ruralville was thrown into a
   state of exitement by the arrival of a strange brig in the harbour. It
   carried no flag, & everything about it was such as would exite suspicion.
   It had no name. Its captain was named Manuel Ruello. The exitement
   increased however when John Griggs dissapeared from his home. This was
   Oct. 4. on Oct. 5 the brig was gone.

                                   Chapter 2.

   The brig, in leaving, was met by a U.S. Frigate and a sharp fight ensued.
   When over, they* missed a man. named Henry Johns.

   *(The Frigate.)

                                   Chapter 3.

   The brig continued its course in the direction of Madagascar, upon its
   arrival, The natives fled in all directions. When they came together on
   the other side of the island, one was missing. His name was Dahabea.

                                   Chapter 4.

   At length it was decided that something must be done. A reward of -L-5,000
   was offered for the capture of Manuel Ruello., When startling news came, a
   nameless brig was wrecked on the Florida Keys.

                                   Chapter 5.

   A ship was sent to Florida, and the mystery was solved. In the exitement
   of the fight they would launch a sub-marine boat and take what they
   wanted. there it lay, tranquilly rocking on the waters of the Atlantic
   when someone called out "John Brown has dissapeared." And sure enough John
   Brown was gone.

                                   Chapter 6.

   The finding of the sub-marine boat, and the dissapearance of John Brown,
   caused renewed exitement amongst the people, when a new discovery was
   made. In transcribing this discovery it is necessary to relate a
   geographical fact. At the N. Pole there exists a vast continent composed
   of volcanic soil, a portion of which is open to explorers. It is called
   "No-Mans Land."

                                   Chapter 7.

   In the extreme southern part of No-Mans Land, there was found a hvt, and
   several other signs of human habitation. they promptly entered, and,
   chained to the floor, lay Griggs, Johns, & Dahabea. They, upon arriving in
   London, separated, Griggs going to Ruralville, Johns to the Frigate, &
   Dahabea to Madagascar.

                                   Chapter 8.

   But the mystery of John Brown was still unsolved, so they kept strict
   watch over the port at No-Mans Land, and when the sub-marine boat arrived,
   and the pirates, one by one, and headed by Manuel Ruello, left the ship,
   they were met by a rapid fire. After the fight brown was recovered.

                                   Chapter 9.

   Griggs was royally recieved at Ruralville, & a dinner was given in honour
   of Henry Johns, Dahabea was made King of Madagascar., & Brown was made
   Captain of his ship.

                                    THE END.

   The Lovecraft Library wishes to extend its gratitude to Jim Java for
   transcribing this text. 
