Nemesis

  by H. P. Lovecraft

Through the ghoul-guarded gateways of slumber,                                   
   Past the wan-mooned abysses of night,                                         
I have lived o'er my lives without number,                                       
   I have sounded all things with my sight;                                      
And I struggle and shriek ere the daybreak, being driven to madness with fright. 
                                                                                 
I have whirled with the earth at the dawning,                                    
   When the sky was a vaporous flame;                                            
I have seen the dark universe yawning                                            
   Where the black planets roll without aim,                                     
Where they roll in their horror unheeded, without knowledge or lustre or name.   
                                                                                 
I had drifted o'er seas without ending,                                          
   Under sinister grey-clouded skies,                                            
That the many-forked lightning is rending,                                       
   That resound with hysterical cries;                                           
With the moans of invisible daemons, that out of the green waters rise.          
                                                                                 
I have plunged like a deer through the arches                                    
   Of the hoary primoridal grove,                                                
Where the oaks feel the presence that marches,                                   
   And stalks on where no spirit dares rove,                                     
And I flee from a thing that surrounds me, and leers through dead branches       
above.                                                                           
                                                                                 
I have stumbled by cave-ridden mountains                                         
   That rise barren and bleak from the plain,                                    
I have drunk of the fog-foetid fountains                                         
   That ooze down to the marsh and the main;                                     
And in hot cursed tarns I have seen things, I care not to gaze on again.         
                                                                                 
I have scanned the vast ivy-clad palace,                                         
   I have trod its untenanted hall,                                              
Where the moon rising up from the valleys                                        
   Shows the tapestried things on the wall;                                      
Strange figures discordantly woven, that I cannot endure to recall.              
                                                                                 
I have peered from the casements in wonder                                       
   At the mouldering meadows around,                                             
At the many-roofed village laid under                                            
   The curse of a grave-girdled ground;                                          
And from rows of white urn-carven marble, I listen intently for sound.           
                                                                                 
I have haunted the tombs of the ages,                                            
   I have flown on the pinions of fear,                                          
Where the smoke-belching Erebus rages;                                           
   Where the jokulls loom snow-clad and drear:                                   
And in realms where the sun of the desert consumes what it never can cheer.      
                                                                                 
I was old when the pharaohs first mounted                                        
   The jewel-decked throne by the Nile;                                          
I was old in those epochs uncounted                                              
   When I, and I only, was vile;                                                 
And Man, yet untainted and happy, dwelt in bliss on the far Arctic isle.         
                                                                                 
Oh, great was the sin of my spirit,                                              
   And great is the reach of its doom;                                           
Not the pity of Heaven can cheer it,                                             
   Nor can respite be found in the tomb:                                         
Down the infinite aeons come beating the wings of unmerciful gloom.              
                                                                                 
Through the ghoul-guarded gateways of slumber,                                   
   Past the wan-mooned abysses of night,                                         
I have lived o'er my lives without number,                                       
   I have sounded all things with my sight;                                      
And I struggle and shriek ere the daybreak, being driven to madness with fright. 
