The Night Ocean

  by H. P. Lovecraft & R. H. Barlow

                                  Written 1936

   I went to Ellston Beach not only for the pleasures of sun and ocean, but
   to rest a weary mind. Since I knew no person in the little town, which
   thrives on summer vacationists and presents only blank windows during most
   of the year, there seemed no likelihood that I might be disturbed. This
   pleased me, for I did not wish to see anything but the expanse of pounding
   surf and the beach lying before my temporary home.

   My long work of the summer was completed when I left the city, and the
   large mural design produced by it had been entered in the contest. It had
   taken me the bulk of the year to finish the painting, and when the last
   brush was cleaned I was no longer reluctant to yield to the claims of
   health and find rest and seclusion for a time. Indeed, when I had been a
   week on the beach I recalled only now and then the work whose success had
   so recently seemed all-important. There was no longer the old concern with
   a hundred complexities of colour and ornament; no longer the fear and
   mistrust of my ability to render a mental image actual, and turn by my own
   skill alone the dim-conceived idea into the careful draught of a design.
   And yet that which later befell me by the lonely shore may have grown
   solely from the mental constitution behind such concern and fear and
   mistrust. For I have always been a seeker, a dreamer, and a ponderer on
   seeking and dreaming; and who can say that such a nature does not open
   latent eyes sensitive to unsuspected worlds and orders of being?

   Now that I am trying to tell what I saw I am conscious of a thousand
   maddening limitations. Things seen by the inward sight, like those
   flashing visions which come as we drift into the blankness of sleep, are
   more vivid and meaningful to us in that form than when we have sought to
   weld them with reality. Set a pen to a dream, and the colour drains from
   it. The ink with which we write seems diluted with something holding too
   much of reality, and we find that after all we cannot delineate the
   incredible memory. It is as if our inward selves, released from the bonds
   of daytime and objectivity, revelled in prisoned emotions which are
   hastily stifled when we translate them. In dreams and visions lie the
   greatest creations of man, for on them rests no yoke of line or hue.
   Forgotten scenes, and lands more obscure than the golden world of
   childhood, spring into the sleeping mind to reign until awakening puts
   them to rout. Amid these may be attained something of the glory and
   contentment for which we yearn; some image of sharp beauties suspected but
   not before revealed, which are to us as the Grail to holy spirits of the
   medieval world. To shape these things on the wheel of art, to seek to
   bring some faded trophy from that intangible realm of shadow and gossamer,
   requires equal skill and memory. For although dreams are in all of us, few
   hands may grasp their moth-wings without tearing them.

   Such skill this narrative does not have. If I might, I would reveal to you
   the hinted events which I perceived dimly, like one who peers into an
   unlit realm and glimpses forms whose motion is concealed. In my mural
   design, which then lay with a multitude of others in the building for
   which they were planned, I had striven equally to catch a trace of this
   elusive shadow-world, and had perhaps succeeded better than I shall now
   succeed. My stay in Ellston was to await the judging of that design; and
   when days of unfamiliar leisure had given me perspective, I discovered
   that - in spite of those weaknesses which a creator always detects most
   clearly - I had indeed managed to retain in line and colour some fragments
   snatched from the endless world of imagining. The difficulties of the
   process, and the resulting strain on all my powers, had undermined my
   health and brought me to the beach during this period of waiting. Since I
   wished to be wholly alone, I rented (to the delight of the incredulous
   owner) a small house some distance from the village of Ellston - which,
   because of the waning season, was alive with a moribund bustle of
   tourists, uniformly uninteresting to me. The house, dark from the sea-wind
   though it had not been painted, was not even a satellite of the village;
   but swung below it on the coast like a pendulum beneath a still clock,
   quite alone upon a hill of weed-grown sand. Like a solitary warm animal it
   crouched facing the sea, and its inscrutable dirty windows stared upon a
   lonely realm of earth and sky and enormous sea. It will not do to use too
   much imagining in a narrative whose facts, could they be augmented and
   fitted into a mosaic, would be strange enough in themselves; but I thought
   the little house was lonely when I saw it, and that like myself, it was
   conscious of its meaningless nature before the great sea.

   I took the place in late August, arriving a day before I was expected, and
   encountering a van and two workingmen unloading the furniture provided by
   the owner. I did not know then how long I would stay, and when the truck
   that brought the goods had left I settled my small luggage and locked the
   door (feeling very proprietary about having a house after months of a
   rented room) to go down the weedy hill and on the beach. Since it was
   quite square and had but one room, the house required little exploration.
   Two windows in each side provided a great quantity of light, and somehow a
   door had been squeezed in as an after-thought on the oceanward wall. The
   place had been built about ten years previously, but on account of its
   distance from Ellston village was difficult to rent even during the active
   summer season. There being no fireplace, it stood empty and alone from
   October until far into the spring. Though actually less than a mile below
   Ellston, it seemed more remote; since a bend in the coast caused one to
   see only grassy dunes in the direction of the village.

   The first day, half-gone when I was installed, I spent in the enjoyment of
   sun and restless water-things whose quiet majesty made the designing of
   murals seem distant and tiresome. But this was the natural reaction to a
   long concern with one set of habits and activities. I was through with my
   work and my vacation was begun. This fact, while elusive for the moment,
   showed in everything which surrounded me that afternoon of my arrival, and
   in the utter change from old scenes. There was an effect of bright sun
   upon a shifting sea of waves whose mysteriously impelled curves were
   strewn with what appeared to be rhinestone. Perhaps a water-colour might
   have caught the solid masses of intolerable light which lay upon the beach
   where the sea mingled with the sand. Although the ocean bore her own hue,
   it was dominated wholly and incredibly by the enormous glare. There was no
   other person near me, and I enjoyed the spectacle without the annoyance of
   any alien object upon the stage. Each of my senses was touched in a
   different way, but sometimes it seemed that the roar of the sea was akin
   to that great brightness, or as if the waves were glaring instead of the
   sun, each of these being so vigorous and insistent that impressions coming
   from them were mingled. Curiously, I saw no one bathing near my little
   square house during that or succeeding afternoons, although the curving
   shore included a wide beach even more inviting than that at the village,
   where the surf was dotted with random figures. I supposed that this was
   because of the distance and because there had never been other houses
   below the town. Why this unbuilt stretch existed, I could not imagine;
   since many dwellings straggled along the northward coast, facing the sea
   with aimless eyes.

   I swam until the afternoon had gone, and later, having rested, walked into
   the little town. Darkness hid the sea from me as I entered, and I found in
   the dingy lights of the streets tokens of a life which was not even
   conscious of the great, gloom-shrouded thing lying so close. There were
   painted women in tinsel adornments, and bored men who were no longer young
   - a throng of foolish marionettes perched on the lip of the ocean-chasm;
   unseeing, unwilling to see what lay above them and about, in the
   multitudinous grandeur of the stars and the leagues of the night ocean. I
   walked along that darkened sea as I went back to the bare little house,
   sending the beams of my flashlight out upon the naked and impenetrable
   void. In the absence of the moon, this light made a solid bar athwart the
   walls of the uneasy tide; and I felt an indescribable emotion born of the
   noise of the waters and the perception of my smallness as I cast that tiny
   beam upon a realm immense in itself, yet only the black border of the
   earthly deep. That nighted deep, upon which ships were moving alone in the
   darkness where I could not see them, gave off the murmur of a distant,
   angry rabble.

   When I reached my high residence I knew that I had passed no one during
   the mile's walk from the village, and yet there somehow lingered an
   impression that I had been all the while accompanied by the spirit of the
   lonely sea. It was, I thought, personified in a shape which was not
   revealed to me, but which moved quietly about beyond my range of
   comprehension. It was like those actors who wait behind darkened scenery
   in readiness for the lines which will shortly call them before our eyes to
   move and speak in the sudden revelation of the footlights. At last I shook
   off this fancy and sought my key to enter the place, whose bare walls gave
   a sudden feeling of security.

   My cottage was entirely free of the village, as if it had wandered down
   the coast and was unable to return; and there I heard nothing of the
   disturbing clamour when I returned each night after supper. I generally
   stayed but a short while upon the streets of Ellston, though sometimes I
   went into the place for the sake of the walk it provided. There were all
   the multitude of curio-shops and falsely regal theatre fronts that clutter
   vacation towns, but I never went into these; and the place seemed useful
   only for its restaurants. It was astonishing the number of useless things
   people found to do.

   There was a succession of sun-filled days at first. I rose early, and
   beheld the grey sky agleam with promise of sunrise; a prophecy fulfilled
   as I stood witness. Those dawns were cold and their colours faint in
   comparison to that uniform radiance of day which gives to every hour the
   quality of white noon. That great light, so apparent the first day, made
   each succeeding day a yellow page in the book of time. I noticed that many
   of the beach people were displeased by the inordinate sun, whereas I
   sought it. After grey months of toil the lethargy induced by a physical
   existence in a region governed by the simple things - the wind and light
   and water - had a prompt effect upon me, and since I was anxious to
   continue this healing process, I spent all my time outdoors in the
   sunlight. This induced a state at once impassive and submissive, and gave
   me a feeling of security against the ravenous night. As darkness is akin
   to death, so is light to vitality. Through the heritage of a million years
   ago, when men were closer to the mother sea, and when the creatures of
   which we are born lay languid in the shallow, sun-pierced water; we still
   seek today the primal things when we are tired, steeping ourselves within
   their lulling security like those early half-mammals which had not yet
   ventured upon the oozy land.

   The monotony of the waves gave repose, and I had no other occupation than
   witnessing a myriad ocean moods. There is a ceaseless change in the waters
   - colours and shades pass over them like the insubstantial expressions of
   a well-known face; and these are at once communicated to us by
   half-recognized senses. When the sea is restless, remembering old ships
   that have gone over her chasms, there comes up silently in our hearts the
   longing for a vanished horizon. But when she forgets, we forget also.
   Though we know her a lifetime, she must always hold an alien air, as if
   something too vast to have shape were lurking in the universe to which she
   is a door. The morning ocean, glimmering with a reflected mist of
   blue-white cloud and expanding diamond foam, has the eyes of one who
   ponders on strange things; and her intricately woven webs, through which
   dart a myriad coloured fishes, hold the air of some great idle thing which
   will arise presently from the hoary immemorial chasms and stride upon the
   land.

   I was content for many days, and glad that I had chosen the lonely house
   which sat like a small beast upon those rounded cliffs of sand. Among the
   pleasantly aimless amusements fostered by such a life, I took to following
   the edge of the tide (where the waves left a damp, irregular outline
   rimmed with evanescent foam) for long distances; and sometimes I found
   curious bits of shell in the chance litter of the sea. There was an
   astonishing lot of debris on that inward-curving coast which my bare
   little house overlooked, and I judged that currents whose courses diverge
   from the village beach must reach that spot. At any rate, my pockets -
   when I had any - generally held vast stores of trash; most of which I
   threw away an hour or two after picking it up, wondering why I had kept
   it. Once, however, I found a small bone whose nature I could not identify,
   save that it was certainly nothing out of a fish; and I kept this, along
   with a large metal bead whose minutely carven design was rather unusual.
   This latter depicted a fishy thing against a patterned background of
   seaweed instead of the usual floral or geometrical designs, and was still
   clearly traceable though worn with years of tossing in the surf. Since I
   had never seen anything like it, I judged that it represented some
   fashion, now forgotten, of a previous year at Ellston, where similar fads
   were common.

   I had been there perhaps a week when the weather began a gradual change.
   Each stage of this progressive darkening was followed by another subtly
   intensified, so that in the end the entire atmosphere surrounding me had
   shifted from day to evening. This was more obvious to me in a series of
   mental impressions than in what I actually witnessed, for the small house
   was lonely under the grey skies, and there was sometimes a beating wind
   that came out of the ocean bearing moisture. The sun was displaced by long
   intervals of cloudiness - layers of grey mist beyond whose unknown depth
   the sun lay cut off. Though it might glare with the old intensity above
   that enormous veil, it could not penetrate. The beach was a prisoner in a
   hueless vault for hours at a time, as if something of the night were
   welling into other hours.

   Although the wind was invigorating and the ocean whipped into little
   churning spirals of activity by the vagrant flapping, I found the water
   growing chill, so that I could not stay in it as long as I had done
   previously, and thus I fell into the habit of long walks, which - when I
   was unable to swim - provided the exercise that I was so careful to
   obtain. These walks covered a greater range of sea-edge than my previous
   wanderings, and since the beach extended in a stretch of miles beyond the
   tawdry village, I often found myself wholly isolated upon an endless area
   of sand as evening drew close. When this occurred, I would stride hastily
   along the whispering sea-border, following the outline so that I should
   not wander inland and lose my way. And sometimes, when these walks were
   late (as they grew increasingly to be) I would come upon the crouching
   house that looked like a harbinger of the village. Insecure upon the
   wind-gnawed cliffs, a dark blot upon the morbid hues of the ocean sunset,
   it was more lonely than by the full light of either orb; and seemed to my
   imagination like a mute, questioning face turned toward me expectant of
   some action. That the place was isolated I have said, and this at first
   pleased me; but in that brief evening hour when the sun left a
   gore-splattered decline and darkness lumbered on like an expanding
   shapeless blot, there was an alien presence about the place: a spirit, a
   mood, an impression that came from the surging wind, the gigantic sky, and
   that sea which drooled blackening waves upon a beach grown abruptly
   strange. At these times I felt an uneasiness which had no very definite
   cause, although my solitary nature had made me long accustomed to the
   ancient silence and the ancient voice of nature. These misgivings, to
   which I could have put no sure name, did not affect me long, yet I think
   now that all the while a gradual consciousness of the ocean's immense
   loneliness crept upon me, a loneliness that was made subtly horrible by
   intimations - which were never more than such - of some animation or
   sentience preventing me from being wholly alone.

   The noisy, yellow streets of the town, with their curiously unreal
   activity, were very far away, and when I went there for my evening meal
   (mistrusting a diet entirely of my own ambiguous cooking) I took
   increasing and quite unreasonable care that I should return to the cottage
   before the late darkness, though I was often abroad until ten or so. You
   will say that such action is unreasonable; that if I had feared the
   darkness in some childish way, I would have entirely avoided it. You will
   ask me why I did not leave the place since its loneliness was depressing
   me. To all this I have no reply, save that whatever unrest I felt,
   whatever of remote disturbance there was to me in brief aspects of the
   darkening sun or the eager salt-brittle wind or in the robe of the dark
   sea that lay crumpled like an enormous garment so close to me, was
   something which had an origin half in my own heart, which showed itself
   only at fleeting moments, and which had no very long effect upon me. In
   the recurrent days of diamond light, with sportive waves flinging blue
   peaks at the basking shore, the memory of dark moods seemed rather
   incredible, yet only an hour or two afterward I might again experience
   these moods once more, and descend to a dim region of despair.

   Perhaps these inward emotions were only a reflection of the sea's own
   mood, for although half of what we see is coloured by the interpretation
   placed upon it by our minds, many of our feelings are shaped quite
   distinctly by external, physical things. The sea can bind us to her many
   moods, whispering to us by the subtle token of a shadow or a gleam upon
   the waves, and hinting in these ways of her mournfulness or rejoicing.
   Always she is remembering old things, and these memories, though we may
   not grasp them, are imparted to us, so that we share her gaiety or
   remorse. Since I was doing no work, seeing no person that I knew, I was
   perhaps susceptible to shades of her cryptic meaning which would have been
   overlooked by another. The ocean ruled my life during the whole of that
   late summer; demanding it as recompense for the healing she had brought
   me.

   There were drownings at the beach that year; and while I heard of these
   only casually (such is our indifference to a death which does not concern
   us, and to which we are not witness), I knew that their details were
   unsavoury. The people who died - some of them swimmers of a skill beyond
   the average - were sometimes not found until many days had elapsed, and
   the hideous vengeance of the deep had scourged their rotten bodies. It was
   as if the sea had dragged them into a chasm-lair, and had mulled them
   about in the darkness until, satisfied that they were no longer of any
   use, she had floated them ashore in a ghastly state. No one seemed to know
   what had caused these deaths. Their frequency excited alarm among the
   timid, since the undertow at Ellston was not strong, and since there were
   known to be no sharks at hand. Whether the bodies showed marks of any
   attacks I did not learn, but the dread of a death which moves among the
   waves and comes on lone people from a lightless, motionless place is a
   dread which men know and do not like. They must quickly find a reason for
   such a death, even if there are no sharks. Since sharks formed only a
   suspected cause, and one never to my knowledge confirmed, the swimmers who
   continued during the rest of the season were on guard against treacherous
   tides rather than against any possible sea-animal. Autumn, indeed, was not
   a great distance off, and some people used this as an excuse for leaving
   the sea, where men were snared by death, and going to the security of
   inland fields, where one cannot even hear the ocean. So August ended, and
   I had been at the beach many days.

   There had been a threat of storm since the fourth of the new month, and on
   the sixth, when I set out for a walk in the damp wind, there was a mass of
   formless cloud, colourless and oppressive, above the ruffled leaden sea.
   The motion of the wind, directed toward no especial goal but stirring
   uneasily, provided a sensation of coming animation - a hint of life in the
   elements which might be the long-expected storm. I had eaten my luncheon
   at Ellston, and though the heavens seemed the closing lid of a great
   casket, I ventured far down the beach and away from both the town and my
   no-longer-to-be-seen house. As the universal grey became spotted with a
   carrion purple - curiously brilliant despite its sombre hue - I found that
   I was several miles from any possible shelter. This, however, did not seem
   very important, for despite the dark skies with their added glow of
   unknown presage I was in a curious mood that flashed through a body grown
   suddenly alert and sensitive to the outline of shapes and meanings that
   were previously dim. Obscurely, a memory came to me; suggested by the
   likeness of the scene to one I had imagined when a story was read to me in
   childhood. That tale - of which I had not thought for many years -
   concerned a woman who was loved by the dark-bearded king of an underwater
   realm of blurred cliffs where fish-things lived; and who was taken from
   the golden-haired youth of her troth by a dark being crowned with a
   priest-like mitre and having the features of a withered ape. What had
   remained in the corner of my fancy was the image of cliffs beneath the
   water against the hueless, dusky no-sky of such a realm; and this, though
   I had forgotten most of the story, was recalled quite unexpectedly by the
   same pattern of cliff and sky which I then beheld. The sight was similar
   to what I had imagined in a year now lost save for random, incomplete
   impressions. Suggestions of this story may have lingered behind certain
   irritating unfinished memories, and in certain values hinted to my senses
   by scenes whose actual worth was bafflingly small. Frequently, in a
   momentary perception, we feel that a feathery landscape (for instance), a
   woman's dress along the curve of a road by afternoon, or the solidity of a
   century-defying tree against the pale morning sky (the conditions more
   than the object being significant) hold something precious, some golden
   virtue that we must grasp. And yet when such a scene or arrangement is
   viewed later, or from another point, we find that it has lost its value
   and meaning for us. Perhaps this is because the thing we see does not hold
   that elusive quality, but only suggests to the mind some very different
   thing which remains unremembered. The baffled mind, not wholly sensing the
   cause of its flashing appreciation, seizes on the object exciting it, and
   is surprised when there is nothing of worth therein. Thus it was when I
   beheld the purpling clouds. They held the stateliness and mystery of old
   monastery towers at twilight, but their aspect was also that of the cliffs
   in the old fairy-tale. Suddenly reminded of this lost image, I half
   expected to see, in the fine-spun dirty foam and among the waves which
   were now as if they had been poured of flawed black glass, the horrid
   figure of that ape-faced creature, wearing a mitre old with verdigris,
   advancing from its kingdom in some lost gulf to which those waves were
   sky.

   I did not see any such creature from the realm of imagining, but as the
   chill wind veered, slitting the heavens like a rustling knife, there lay
   in the gloom of merging cloud and water only a grey object, like a piece
   of driftwood, tossing obscurely on the foam. This was a considerable
   distance out, and since it vanished shortly, may not have been wood, but a
   porpoise coming to the troubled surface.

   I soon found that I had stayed too long contemplating the rising storm and
   linking my early fancies with its grandeur, for an icy rain began spotting
   down, bringing a more uniform gloom upon a scene already too dark for the
   hour. Hurrying along the grey sand, I felt the impact of cold drops upon
   my back, and before many moments my clothing was soaked throughout. At
   first I had run, put to flight by the colourless drops whose pattern hung
   in long linking strands from an unseen sky; but after I saw that refuge
   was too far to reach in anything like a dry state, I slackened my pace,
   and returned home as if I had walked under clear skies. There was not much
   reason to hurry, although I did not idle as upon previous occasions. The
   constraining wet garments were cold upon me, and with the gathering
   darkness, and the wind that rose endlessly from the ocean, I could not
   repress a shiver. Yet there was, beside the discomfort of the precipitous
   rain, an exhilaration latent in the purplish ravelled masses of cloud and
   the stimulated reactions of the body. In a mood half of exultant pleasure
   from resisting the rain (which streamed from me now, and filled my shoes
   and pockets) and half of strange appreciation of those morbid, dominant
   skies which hovered with dark wings above the shifting eternal sea, I
   tramped along the grey corridor of Ellston Beach. More rapidly than I had
   expected the crouching house showed in the oblique, flapping rain, and all
   the weeds of the sand cliff writhed in accompaniment to the frantic wind,
   as if they would uproot themselves to join the far-travelling element. Sea
   and sky had altered not at all, and the scene was that which had
   accompanied me, save that there was now painted upon it the hunching roof
   that seemed to bend from the assailing rain. I hurried up the insecure
   steps, and let myself into a dry room, where, unconsciously surprised that
   I was free of the nagging wind, I stood for a moment with water rilling
   from every inch of me.

   There are two windows in the front of that house, one on each side, and
   these face nearly straight upon the ocean; which I now saw half obscured
   by the combined veils of the rain and the imminent night. From these
   windows I looked as I dressed myself in a motley array of dry garments
   seized from convenient hangers and from a chair too laden to sit upon. I
   was prisoned on all sides by an unnaturally increased dusk which had
   filtered down at some undefined hour under cover of the fostering storm.
   How long I had been on the reaches of wet grey sand, or what the real time
   was, I could not tell, though a moment's search produced my watch -
   fortunately left behind and thus avoiding the uniform wetness of my
   clothing. I half guessed the hour from the dimly seen hands, which were
   only slightly less indecipherable than the surrounding figures. In another
   moment my sight penetrated the gloom (greater in the house than beyond the
   bleared window) and saw that it was 6:45.

   There had been no one upon the beach as I came in, and naturally I
   expected to see no further swimmers that night. Yet when I looked again
   from the window there appeared surely to be figures blotting the grime of
   the wet evening. I counted three moving about in some incomprehensible
   manner, and close to the house another - which may not have been a person
   but a wave-ejected log, for the surf was now pounding fiercely. I was
   startled to no little degree, and wondered for what purpose those hardy
   persons stayed out in such a storm. And then I thought that perhaps like
   myself they had been caught unintentionally in the rain and had
   surrendered to the watery gusts. In another moment, prompted by a certain
   civilized hospitality which overcame my love of solitude, I stepped to the
   door and emerged momentarily (at the cost of another wetting, for the rain
   promptly descended upon me in exultant fury) on the small porch,
   gesticulating toward the people. But whether they did not see me, or did
   not understand, they made no returning signal. Dim in the evening, they
   stood as if half*surprised, or as if they awaited some other action from
   me. There was in their attitude something of that cryptic blankness,
   signifying anything or nothing, which the house wore about itself as seen
   in the morbid sunset. Abruptly there came to me a feeling that a sinister
   quality lurked about those un-moving figures who chose to stay in the
   rainy night upon a beach deserted by all people, and I closed the door
   with a surge of annoyance which sought all too vainly to disguise a deeper
   emotion of fear; a consuming fright that welled up from the shadows of my
   consciousness. A moment later, when I had stepped to the window, there
   seemed to be nothing outside but the portentous night. Vaguely puzzled,
   and even more vaguely frightened - like one who has seen no alarming
   thing, but is apprehensive of what may be found in the dark street he is
   soon compelled to cross - I decided that I had very possibly seen no one;
   and that the murky air had deceived me.

   The aura of isolation about the place increased that night, though just
   out of sight on the northward beach a hundred houses rose in the rainy
   darkness, their light bleared and yellow above streets of polished glass,
   like goblin-eyes reflected in an oily forest pool. Yet because I could not
   see them, or even reach them in bad weather - since I had no car nor any
   way to leave the crouching house except by walking in the figure-haunted
   darkness - I realized quite suddenly that I was, to all intents, alone
   with the dreary sea that rose and subsided unseen, unkenned, in the mist.
   And the voice of the sea had become a hoarse groan, like that of something
   wounded which shifts about before trying to rise.

   Fighting away the prevalent gloom with a soiled lamp - for the darkness
   crept in at my windows and sat peering obscurely at me from the corners
   like a patient animal - I prepared my food, since I had no intentions of
   going to the village. The hour seemed incredibly advanced, though it was
   not yet nine o'clock when I went to bed. Darkness had come early and
   furtively, and throughout the remainder of my stay lingered evasively over
   each scene and action which I beheld. Something had settled out of the
   night - something forever undefined, but stirring a latent sense within
   me, so that I was like a beast expecting the momentary rustle of an enemy.

   There were hours of wind, and sheets of the downpour flapped endlessly on
   the meagre walls barring it from me. Lulls came in which I heard the
   mumbling sea, and I could guess that large formless waves jostled one
   another in the pallid whine of the winds, and flung on the beach a spray
   bitter with salt. Yet in the very monotony of the restless elements I
   found a lethargic note, a sound that beguiled me, after a time, into
   slumber grey and colourless as the night. The sea continued its mad
   monologue, and the wind her nagging; but these were shut out by the walls
   of unconsciousness, and for a time the night ocean was banished from a
   sleeping mind.

   Morning brought an enfeebled sun - a sun like that which men will see when
   the earth is old, if there are any men left; a sun more weary than the
   shrouded, moribund sky. Faint echo of its old image, Phoebus strove to
   pierce the ragged, ambiguous clouds as I awoke, at moments sending a wash
   of pale gold rippling across the northwestern interior of my house, at
   others waning till it was only a luminous ball, like some incredible
   plaything forgotten on the celestial lawn. After a while the falling rain
   - which must have continued throughout the previous night - succeeded in
   washing away those vestiges of purple cloud which had been like the ocean
   cliffs in an old fairy-tale. Cheated alike of the setting and rising sun,
   that day merged with the day before, as if the intervening storm had not
   ushered a long darkness into the world, but had swollen and subsided into
   one long afternoon. Gaining heart, the furtive sun exerted all his force
   in dispelling the old mist, streaked now like a dirty window, and cast it
   from his realm. The shallow blue day advanced as those grimy wisps
   retreated, and the loneliness which had encircled me welled back into a
   watchful place of retreat, whence it went no farther, but crouched and
   waited.

   The ancient brightness was now once more upon the sun, and the old glitter
   on the waves, whose playful blue shapes had flocked upon that coast ere
   man was born, and would rejoice unseen when he was forgotten in the
   sepulchre of time. Influenced by these thin assurances, like one who
   believes the smile of friendship on an enemy's features, I opened my door,
   and as it swung outward, a black spot upon the inward burst of light, I
   saw the beach washed clean of any track, as if no foot before mine had
   disturbed the smooth sand. With the quick lift of spirit that follows a
   period of uneasy depression, I felt - in a purely yielding fashion and
   without volition - that my own memory was washed clean of all the mistrust
   and suspicion and disease-like fear of a lifetime, just as the filth of
   the water's edge succumbs to a particularly high tide and is carried out
   of sight. There was a scent of soaked, brackish grass, like the mouldy
   pages of a book, commingled with a sweet odour born of the hot sunlight
   upon inland meadows, and these were borne into me like an exhilarating
   drink, seeping and tingling through my veins as if they would convey to me
   something of their own impalpable nature, and float me dizzily in the
   aimless breeze. And conspiring with these things, the sun continued to
   shower upon me, like the rain of yesterday, an incessant array of bright
   spears; as if it also wished to hide that suspected background presence
   which moved beyond my sight and was betrayed only by a careless rustle on
   the borders of my consciousness, or by the aspect of blank figures staring
   out of an ocean void. That sun, a fierce ball solitary in the whirlpool of
   infinity, was like a horde of golden moths against my upturned face. A
   bubbling white grail of fire divine and incomprehensible, it withheld from
   me a thousand promised mirages where it granted one. For the sun did
   actually seem to indicate realms, secure and fanciful, where if I but knew
   the path I might wander in this curious exultation. Such things come of
   our own natures, for life has never yielded for one moment her secrets,
   and it is only in our interpretation of their hinted images that we may
   find ecstasy or dullness, according to a deliberately induced mood. Yet
   ever and again we must succumb to her deceptions, believing for the moment
   that we may this time find the withheld joy. And in this way the fresh
   sweetness of the wind, on a morning following the haunted darkness (whose
   evil intimations had given me a greater uneasiness than any menace to my
   body), whispered to me of ancient mysteries only half-linked with earth,
   and of pleasures that were the sharper because I felt that I might
   experience only a part of them. The sun and wind and that scent that rose
   upon them told me of festivals of gods whose senses are a millionfold more
   poignant than man's and whose joys are a millionfold more subtle and
   prolonged. These things, they hinted, could be mine if I gave myself
   wholly into their bright deceptive power; and the sun, a crouching god
   with naked celestial flesh, an unknown, too-mighty furnace upon which no
   eye might look, seemed almost sacred in the glow of my newly sharpened
   emotions. The ethereal thunderous light it gave was something before which
   all things must worship astonished. The slinking leopard in his
   green-chasmed forest must have paused briefly to consider its
   leaf-scattered rays, and all things nurtured by it must have cherished its
   bright message on such a day. For when it is absent in the far reaches of
   eternity, earth will be lost and black against an illimitable void. That
   morning, in which I shared the fire of life, and whose brief moment of
   pleasure is secure against the ravenous years, was astir with the
   beckoning of strange things whose elusive names can never be written.

   As I made my way toward the village, wondering how it might look after a
   long-needed scrubbing by the industrious rain, I saw, tangled in a glimmer
   of sunlit moisture that was poured over it like a yellow vintage, a small
   object like a hand, some twenty feet ahead of me, and touched by the
   repetitious foam. The shock and disgust born in my startled mind when I
   saw that it was indeed a piece of rotten flesh overcame my new
   contentment, and engendered a shocked suspicion that it might actually be
   a hand. Certainly, no fish, or part of one, could assume that look, and I
   thought I saw mushy fingers wed in decay. I turned the thing over with my
   foot, not wishing to touch so foul an object, and it adhered stickily to
   the leather of the shoe, as if clutching with the grasp of corruption. The
   thing, whose shape was nearly lost, held too much resemblance to what I
   feared it might be, and I pushed it into the willing grasp of a seething
   wave, which took it from sight with an alacrity not often shown by those
   ravelled edges of the sea.

   Perhaps I should have reported my find, yet its nature was too ambiguous
   to make action natural. Since it had been partly eaten by some
   ocean-dwelling monstrousness, I did not think it identifiable enough to
   form evidence of an unknown but possible tragedy. The numerous drownings,
   of course, came into my mind - as well as other things lacking in
   wholesomeness, some of which remained only as possibilities. Whatever the
   storm-dislodged fragment may have been, and whether it were fish or some
   animal akin to man, I have never spoken of it until now. And after all,
   there was no proof that it had not merely been distorted by rottenness
   into that shape.

   I approached the town, sickened by the presence of such an object amid the
   apparent beauty of the clean beach, though it was horribly typical of the
   indifference of death in a nature which mingles rottenness with beauty,
   and perhaps loves the former more. In Ellston I heard of no recent
   drowning or other mishap of the sea, and found no reference to such in the
   columns of the local paper - the only one I read during my stay.

   It is difficult to describe the mental state in which succeeding days
   found me. Always susceptible to morbid emotions whose dark anguish might
   be induced by things outside myself, or might spring from the abysses of
   my own spirit, I was ridden by a feeling which was not fear or despair, or
   anything akin to these, but was rather a perception of the brief
   hideousness and underlying filth of life - a feeling partly a reflection
   of my internal nature and partly a result of breedings induced by that
   gnawed rotten object which may have been a hand. In those days my mind was
   a place of shadowed cliffs and dark moving figures, like the ancient
   unsuspected realm which the fairy-tale recalled to me. I felt, in brief
   agonies of disillusionment, the gigantic blackness of this overwhelming
   universe, in which my days and the days of my race were as nothing to the
   shattered stars; a universe in which each action is vain and even the
   emotion of grief a wasted thing.

   The hours I had previously spent in something of regained health,
   contentment, and physical well-being were given now (as if those days of
   the previous week were something definitely ended) to an indolence like
   that of a man who no longer cares to live. I was engulfed by a piteous
   lethargic fear of some ineluctable doom which would be, I felt, the
   completed hate of the peering stars and of the black enormous waves that
   hoped to clasp my bones within them - the vengeance of all the
   indifferent, horrendous majesty of the night ocean.

   Something of the darkness and restlessness of the sea had penetrated my
   heart, so that I lived in an unreasoning, unperceiving torment; a torment
   none the less acute because of the subtlety of its origin and the strange,
   unmotivated quality of its vampiric existence. Before my eyes lay the
   phantasmagoria of the purpling clouds, the strange silver bauble, the
   recurrent stagnant foam, the loneliness of that bleak-eyed house, and the
   mockery of the puppet town. I no longer went to the village, for it seemed
   only a travesty of life. Like my own soul, it stood upon a dark enveloping
   sea - a sea grown slowly hateful to me. And among these images, corrupt
   and festering, dwelt that of an object whose human contours left ever
   smaller the doubt of what it once had been.

   These scribbled words can never tell of the hideous loneliness (something
   I did not even wish assuaged, so deeply was it embedded in my heart) which
   had insinuated itself within me, mumbling of terrible and unknown things
   stealthily circling nearer. It was not a madness: rather was it a too
   clear and naked perception of the darkness beyond this frail existence,
   lit by a momentary sun no more secure than ourselves; a realization of
   futility that few can experience and ever again touch the life about them;
   a knowledge that turn as I might, battle as I might with all the remaining
   power of my spirit, I could neither win an inch of ground from the
   inimical universe, nor hold for even a moment the life entrusted to me.
   Fearing death as I did life, burdened with a nameless dread, yet unwilling
   to leave the scene evoking it, I awaited whatever consummating horror was
   shifting itself in the immense region beyond the walls of consciousness.

   Thus autumn found me, and what I had gained from the sea was lost back
   into it. Autumn on the beaches - a drear time betokened by no scarlet leaf
   nor any other accustomed sign. A frightening sea which changes not, though
   man changes. There was only a chilling of the waters, in which I no longer
   cared to enter - a further darkening of the pall-like sky, as if
   eternities of snow were waiting to descend upon the ghastly waves. Once
   that descent began, it would never cease, but would continue beneath the
   white and the yellow and the crimson sun, and beneath that ultimate small
   ruby which shall yield only to the futilities of night. The once friendly
   waters babbled meaningfully at me, and eyed me with a strange regard, yet
   whether the darkness of the scene were a reflection of my own breedings or
   whether the gloom within me were caused by what lay without, I could not
   have told. Upon the beach and me alike had fallen a shadow, like that of a
   bird which flies silently overhead - a bird whose watching eyes we do not
   suspect till the image on the ground repeats the image in the sky, and we
   look suddenly upward to find that something has been circling above us
   hitherto unseen.

   The day was in late September, and the town had closed the resorts where
   mad frivolity ruled empty, fear-haunted lives, and where raddled puppets
   performed their summer antics. The puppets were cast aside, smeared with
   the painted smiles and frowns they had last assumed, and there were not a
   hundred people left in the town. Again the gaudy, stucco-fronted buildings
   lining the shore were permitted to crumble undisturbed in the wind. As the
   month advanced to the day of which I speak, there grew in me the light of
   a grey infernal dawn, wherein I felt some dark thaumaturgy would be
   completed. Since I feared such a thaumaturgy less than a continuance of my
   horrible suspicions - less than the too-elusive hints of something
   monstrous lurking behind the great stage - it was with more speculation
   than actual fear that I waited unendingly for the day of horror which
   seemed to be nearing. The day, I repeat, was late in September, though
   whether the 22nd or 23rd I am uncertain. Such details have fled before the
   recollection of those uncompleted happenings - episodes with which no
   orderly existence should be plagued, because of the damnable suggestions
   (and only suggestions) they contain. I knew the time with an intuitive
   distress of spirit - a recognition too deep for me to explain. Throughout
   those daylight hours I was expectant of the night; impatient, perhaps, so
   that the sunlight passed like a half-glimpsed reflection in rippled water
   - a day of whose events I recall nothing.

   It was long since that portentous storm had cast a shadow over the beach,
   and I had determined, after hesitations caused by nothing tangible, to
   leave Ellston, since the year was chilling and there was no return to my
   earlier contentment. When a telegram came for me (lying two days in the
   Western Union office before I was located, so little was my name known)
   saying that my design had been accepted - winning above all others in the
   contest - I set a date for leaving. This news, which earlier in the year
   would have affected me strongly, I now received with a curious apathy. It
   seemed as unrelated to the unreality about me, as little pertinent to me,
   as if it were directed to another person whom I did not know, and whose
   message had come to me through some accident. None the less, it was that
   which forced me to complete my plans and leave the cottage by the shore.

   There were only four nights of my stay remaining when there occurred the
   last of those events whose meaning lies more in the darkly sinister
   impression surrounding them than in anything obviously threatening. Night
   had settled over Ellston and the coast, and a pile of soiled dishes
   attested both to my recent meal and to my lack of industry. Darkness came
   as I sat with a cigarette before the seaward window, and it was a liquid
   which gradually filled the sky, washing in a floating moon, monstrously
   elevated. The flat sea bordering upon the gleaming sand, the utter absence
   of tree or figure or life of any sort, and the regard of that high moon
   made the vastness of my surroundings abruptly clear. There were only a few
   stars pricking through, as if to accentuate by their smallness the majesty
   of the lunar orb and of the restless shifting tide.

   I had stayed indoors, fearing somehow to go out before the sea on such a
   night of shapeless portent, but I heard it mumbling secrets of an
   incredible lore. Borne to me on a wind out of nowhere was the breath of
   some strange palpitant life - the embodiment of all I had felt and of all
   I had suspected - stirring now in the chasms of the sky or beneath the
   mute waves. In what place this mystery turned from an ancient, horrible
   slumber I could not tell, but like one who stands by a figure lost in
   sleep, knowing that it will awake in a moment, I crouched by the window,
   holding a nearly burnt-out cigarette, and faced the rising moon.

   Gradually there passed into that never-stirring landscape a brilliance
   intensified by the overhead glimmerings, and I seemed more and more under
   some compulsion to watch whatever might follow. The shadows were draining
   from the beach, and I felt that with them were all which might have been a
   harbour for my thoughts when the hinted thing should come. Where any of
   them did remain they were ebon and blank: still lumps of darkness
   sprawling beneath the cruel brilliant rays. The endless tableau of the
   lunar orb - dead now, whatever her past was, and cold as the unhuman
   sepulchres she bears amid the ruin of dusty centuries older than men - and
   the sea - astir, perhaps, with some unkenned life, some forbidden
   sentience - confronted me with a horrible vividness. I arose and shut the
   window; partly because of an inward prompting, but mostly, I think, as an
   excuse for transferring momentarily the stream of thought. No sound came
   to me now as I stood before the closed panes. Minutes or eternities were
   alike. I was waiting, like my own fearing heart and the motionless scene
   beyond, for the token of some ineffable life. I had set the lamp upon a
   box in the western corner of the room, but the moon was brighter, and her
   bluish rays invaded places where the lamplight was faint. The ancient glow
   of the round silent orb lay upon the beach as it had lain for aeons, and I
   waited in a torment of expectancy made doubly acute by the delay in
   fulfillment and the uncertainty of what strange completion was to come.

   Outside the crouching hut a white illumination suggested vague spectral
   forms whose unreal, phantasmal motions seemed to taunt my blindness, just
   as unheard voices mocked my eager listening. For countless moments I was
   still, as if Time and the tolling of her great bell were hushed into
   nothingness. And yet there was nothing which I might fear: the
   moon-chiselled shadows were unnatural in no contour, and veiled nothing
   from my eyes. The night was silent - I knew that despite my closed window
   - and all the stars were fixed mournfully in a listening heaven of dark
   grandeur. No motion from me then, or word now, could reveal my plight, or
   tell of the fear-racked brain imprisoned in flesh which dared not break
   the silence, for all the torture it brought. As if expectant of death, and
   assured that nothing could serve to banish the soul-peril I confronted I
   crouched with a forgotten cigarette in my hand. A silent world gleamed
   beyond the cheap, dirty windows, and in one corner of the room a pair of
   dirty oars, placed there before my arrival, shared the vigil of my spirit.
   The lamp burned endlessly, yielding a sick light hued like a corpse's
   flesh. Glancing at it now and again for the desperate distraction it gave,
   I saw that many bubbles unaccountably rose and vanished in the
   kerosene-filled base. Curiously enough, there was no heat from the wick.
   And suddenly I became aware that the night as a whole was neither warm nor
   cold, but strangely neutral - as if all physical forces were suspended,
   and all the laws of a calm existence disrupted.

   Then, with an unheard splash which sent from the silver water to the shore
   a line of ripples echoed in fear by my heart, a swimming thing emerged
   beyond the breakers. The figure may have been that of a dog, a human
   being, or something more strange. It could not have known that I watched -
   perhaps it did not care - but like a distorted fish it swam across the
   mirrored stars and dived beneath the surface. After a moment it came up
   again, and this time, since it was closer, I saw that it was carrying
   something across its shoulder. I knew, then, that it could be no animal,
   and that it was a man or something like a man, which came toward the land
   from a dark ocean. But it swam with a horrible ease.

   As I watched, dread-filled and passive, with the fixed stare of one who
   awaits death in another yet knows he cannot avert it, the swimmer
   approached the shore - though too far down the southward beach for me to
   discern its outlines or features. Obscurely loping, with sparks of moonlit
   foam scattered by its quick gait, it emerged and was lost among the inland
   dunes.

   Now I was possessed by a sudden recurrence of fear, which had died away in
   the previous moments. There was a tingling coldness all over me - though
   the room, whose window I dared not open now, was stuffy. I thought it
   would be very horrible if something were to enter a window which was not
   closed.

   Now that I could no longer see the figure, I felt that it lingered
   somewhere in the close shadows, or peered hideously at me from whatever
   window I did not watch. And so I turned my gaze, eagerly and frantically,
   to each successive pane; dreading that I might indeed behold an intrusive
   regarding face, yet unable to keep myself from the terrifying inspection.
   But though I watched for hours, there was no longer anything upon the
   beach.

   So the night passed, and with it began the ebbing of that strangeness - a
   strangeness which had surged up like an evil brew within a pot, had
   mounted to the very rim in a breathless moment, had paused uncertainly
   there, and had subsided, taking with it whatever unknown message it had
   borne. Like the stars that promise the revelation of terrible and glorious
   memories, goad us into worship by this deception, and then impart nothing,
   I had come frighteningly near to the capture of an old secret which
   ventured close to man's haunts and lurked cautiously just beyond the edge
   of the known. Yet in the end I had nothing. I was given only a glimpse of
   the furtive thing; a glimpse made obscure by the veils of ignorance. I
   cannot even conceive what might have shown itself had I been too close to
   that swimmer who went shoreward instead of into the ocean. I do not know
   what might have come if the brew had passed the rim of the pot and poured
   outward in a swift cascade of revelation. The night ocean withheld
   whatever it had nurtured. I shall know nothing more.

   Even yet I do not know why the ocean holds such a fascination for me. But
   then, perhaps none of us can solve those things - they exist in defiance
   of all explanation. There are men, and wise men, who do not like the sea
   and its lapping surf on yellow shores; and they think us strange who love
   the mystery of the ancient and unending deep. Yet for me there is a
   haunting and inscrutable glamour in all the ocean's moods. It is in the
   melancholy silver foam beneath the moon's waxen corpse; it hovers over the
   silent and eternal waves that beat on naked shores; it is there when all
   is lifeless save for unknown shapes that glide through sombre depths. And
   when I behold the awesome billows surging in endless strength, there comes
   upon me an ecstasy akin to fear; so that I must abase myself before this
   mightiness, that I may not hate the clotted waters and their overwhelming
   beauty.

   Vast and lonely is the ocean, and even as all things came from it, so
   shall they return thereto. In the shrouded depths of time none shall reign
   upon the earth, nor shall any motion be, save in the eternal waters. And
   these shall beat on dark shores in thunderous foam, though none shall
   remain in that dying world to watch the cold light of the enfeebled moon
   playing on the swirling tides and coarse-grained sand. On the deep's
   margin shall rest only a stagnant foam, gathering about the shells and
   bones of perished shapes that dwelt within the waters. Silent, flabby
   things will toss and roll along empty shores, their sluggish life extinct.
   Then all shall be dark, for at last even the white moon on the distant
   waves shall wink out. Nothing shall be left, neither above nor below the
   sombre waters. And until that last millennium, and beyond the perishing of
   all other things, the sea will thunder and toss throughout the dismal
   night.

   The Lovecraft Library wishes to extend its gratitude to Pytheon for
   transcribing this text. 
