The Despised Pastoral

  by H.P. Lovecraft

   Among the many and complex tendencies observable in modern poetry, or what
   answers for poetry in this age, is a decided but unjust scorn of the
   honest old pastoral, immortalised by Theocritus and Virgil, and revived in
   our own literature by Spencer.

   Nor is this unfavorable attitude confined alone to the formal eclogue
   whose classical elements are so well described and exemplified by Mr.
   Pope. Whenever a versifier adorns his song with the pleasing and innocent
   imagery of this type of composition, or borrows its mild and sweet
   atmosphere, he is forthwith condemned as an irresponsible pedant and
   fossil by every little-wit critic in Grub-street.

   Modern bards, in their endeavour to display with seriousness and minute
   verisimilitude the inward operations of the human mind and emotions, have
   come to look down upon the simple description of ideal beauty, or the
   straightforward presentation of pleasing images for no other purpose than
   to delight the fancy. Such themes they deem trivial and artificial, and
   altogether unworthy of an art whose design they take to be the analysis
   and reproduction of Nature in all her moods and aspects.

   But in this belief, the writer cannot but hold that our contemporaries are
   misjudging the true province and functions of poesy. It was no starched
   classicist, but the exceedingly unconventional Edgar Allen Poe, who
   roundly denounced the melancholy metaphysicians and maintained that true
   poetry has for its first object "pleasure, not truth", and "indefinite
   pleasure instead of definite pleasure," intimating that its concern for
   the dull or ugly aspects of life is slight ideed. That the American bard
   and critic was fundamentally just in his deductions, seems well proved by
   a comparative survey of those poems of all ages which have lived, and
   those which have fallen into deserved obscurity.

   The English pastoral, based upon the best models of antiquity, depicts
   engaging scenes of Arcadian simplicity, which not only transport the
   imagination through their intrinsic beauty, but recall to the scholarly
   mind the choicest remembrances of classical Greece and Rome. Though the
   combination of rural pursuits with polished sentiments and diction is
   patently artificial, the beauty is not a whit less; nor do the
   conventional names, phrases, and images detract in the least from the
   quaint agreeableness of the whole. The magic of this sort of verse is to
   any unprejudiced mind irresistible, and capable of evoking a more
   deliciously placid and refreshing train of pictures in the imagination
   than may be obtained from any more realistic species of composition. Every
   untainted fancy begets ideal visions of which the pastoral forms a
   legitimate and artistically necessary reflection.

   It is not impossible that the intellectual upheaval attendant upon the
   present conflict will bring about a general simplification and
   rectification of taste, and an appreciation of the value of pure imaginary
   beauty in a world so full of actual misery, which may combine to restore
   the despised pastoral to its proper station.

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------
