The Peace Advocate

  by H.P. Lovecraft

          (Supposed to be a "pome," but cast strictly in modern metre) 
                                                                       
          The vicar sat in the firelight's glow,                       
          A volume in his hand,                                        
          And a tear he shed for the widespread woe,                   
          And the anguish brought by the vicious foe                   
          That overran the land.                                       
                                                                       
          But never a hand for his King raised he,                     
          For he was a man of peace;                                   
          And he car'd not a whit for the victory                      
          That must come to preserve his nation free,                  
          And the world from fear release.                             
                                                                       
          His son had buckled on his sword,                            
          The first at the front was he.                               
          But the vicar his valiant child ignor'd                      
          And his noble deeds in the field deplor'd,                   
          For he knew not bravery.                                     
                                                                       
          On his flock he strove to fix his will,                      
          And lead them to scorn the fray.                             
          He told them that conquest brings but ill;                   
          That meek submission would serve them still                  
          To keep the foe away.                                        
                                                                       
          In vain did he hear the bugle's sound                        
          That strove to avert the fall.                               
          The land, quoth he, is all men's ground,                     
          What matter if friend or foe be found                        
          As master of us all?                                         
                                                                       
          One day from the village green hard by                       
          The vicar heard a roar                                       
          Of cannon that rival'd the anguish'd cry                     
          Of the hundreds that liv'd but wish'd to die                 
          As the enemy rode them o'er.                                 
                                                                       
          Now he sees his own cathedral shake                          
          At the foemen's wanton aim.                                  
          The ancient towers with the bullets quake;                   
          The steeples fall, the foundations break,                    
          And the whole is lost in flame.                              
                                                                       
          Up the vicarage lane file the cavalcade,                     
          And the vicar, and daughter, and wife                        
          Scream out in vain for the needed aid                        
          That only a regiment might have made                         
          Ere they lose what is more than life.                        
                                                                       
          Then quick to his brain came manhood's thought.              
          As he saw his erring course,                                 
          And the vicar his dusty rifle brought                        
          That the foe might at least by one be fought,                
          And force repaid with force.                                 
                                                                       
          One shot - the enemy's blasting fire                         
          A breach in the wall cuts through,                           
          But the vicar replies with his wakened ire;                  
          Fells one arm'd brute for each fallen spire,                 
          And in blood is born anew.                                   
                                                                       
          Two shots - the wife and daughter sink,                      
          Each with a mortal wound,                                    
          And the vicar, too madden'd by far to think,                 
          Rushes boldly on to death's vague brink                      
          With the manhood he has found.                               
                                                                       
          Three shots - but shots of another kind                      
          The smoky regions rend.                                      
          And upon the foemen with rage gone blind,                    
          like a ceaseless, resistless, avenging wind,                 
          The rescuing troops descend.                                 
                                                                       
          The smoke-pall clears, and the vicar's son                   
          His father's life has sav'd.                                 
          And the vicar looks o'er ruin done,                          
          Ere the victory by his child was won,                        
          His face with care engrav'd.                                 
                                                                       
          The vicar sat in the firelight's glow,                       
          The volume in his hand                                       
          That brought to his hearth the bitter woe                    
          Which only a husband and father can know,                    
          And truly understand.                                        
                                                                       
          With a chasten'd mien he flung the book                      
          To the leaping flames before,                                
          And a breath of sad relief he took                           
          As the pages blacken'd beneath his look -                    
          The fool of peace no more!                                   
                                                                       
          Epilogue                                                     
                                                                       
          The reverend parson, wak'd to man's estate,                  
          Laments his wife's and daughter's common fate.               
          His martial son in warm embrace enfolds,                     
          And clings the tighter to the child he holds:                
          His peaceful notions, banish'd in an hour,                   
          Will nevermore his wit or sense devour,                      
          But steep'd in truth, 'tis now his nobler plan               
          To cure, yet recognize, the faults of man.                   
