The Poe-et's Nightmare

  by H. P. Lovecraft

                                    A Fable                        
                                                                   
                       Luxus tumultus semper causa est.            
                                                                   
             Lucullus Languish, student of the skies,              
             And connoisseur of rarebits and mince pies,           
             A bard by choice, a grocer's clerk by trade,          
             (Grown pessimist through honours long delay'd)        
             A secret yearning bore, that he might shine           
             In breathing numbers, and in song divine.             
             Each day his fountain pen was wont to drop            
             An ode or dirge or two about the shop,                
             Yet naught could strike the chord within his heart    
             That throbb'd for poesy, and cry'd for art.           
             Each eve he sought his bashful Muse to wake           
             With overdoses of ice cream and cake,                 
             But though th'ambitious youth a dreamer grew,         
             Th' Aonian Nymph delcin'd to come to view.            
                                                                   
             Something at dusk he scour'd the heav'ns afar         
             Searching for raptures in the evening star;           
             One night he strove to catch a tale untold            
             In crystal deeps - but only caught a cold.            
             So pin'd Lucullus with his lofty woe,                 
             Till one drear day he bought a set of Poe:            
             Charm'd with the cheerful horrors there display's,    
             He vow'd with gloom to woo the Heav'nly Maid.         
             Of Auber's Tarn and Yaanek's slope he dreams,         
             And weaves an hundred Ravens in his schemes.          
             Not far from our young hero's peaceful home,          
             Lies the fair grove wherein he loves to roam.         
             Though but a stunted copse in vacant lot,             
             He dubs it Temp-e, and adores the spot;               
             When shallow puddles dot the wooded plain,            
             And brim o'er muddy banks with muddy rain,            
             He calls them limpid lakes or poison pools,           
             (Depending on which bard his fancy rules.)            
             'Tis here he comes with Heliconian fire               
             On Sundays when he smites the Attic lyre;             
             And here one afternoon he brought his gloom,          
             Resolv'd to chant a poet's lay of doom.               
             Roget's Thesaurus, and a book of rhymes,              
             Provide the rungs whereon his spirit climbs:          
             With this grave retinue he trod the grove             
             And pray'd the Fauns he might a Poe-et prove.         
             But sad to tell, ere Pegasus flew high,               
             The not unrelish'd supper hour drew nigh;             
             Our tuneful swain th'imperious call attends,          
             And soon above the groaning table bends.              
             Though it were too prosaic to relate                  
             Th' exact particulars of what he ate,                 
             (Such long-drawn lists the hasty reader skips,        
             Like Homer's well-known catalogue of ships)           
             This much we swear: that as adjournment near'd,       
             A monstrous lot of cake had disappear'd!              
             Soon to his chamber the young bard repairs,           
             And courts soft Somnus with sweet Lydian airs;        
             Through open casement scans the star-strown deep,     
             And 'neath Orion's beams sinks off to sleep.          
                                                                   
             Now start from airy dell the elfin train              
             That dance each midnight o'er the sleeping plain,     
             To bless the just, or cast a warning spell            
             On those who dine not wisely, but too well.           
             First Deacon Smith they plague, whose nasal glow      
             Comes from what Holmes hath call'd "Elixir Pro";      
             Group'd round the couch his visage they deride,       
             Whilst through his dreams unnumber'd serpents glide.  
             Next troop the little folk into the room              
             Where snore our young Endymion, swath'd in gloom:     
             A smile lights up his boyish face, whilst he          
             Dreams of the moon - or what he ate at tea.           
             The chieftain elf th' unconscious youth surveys,      
             and on his form a strange enchantment lays:           
             Those lips, that lately trill'd with frosted cake,    
             Uneasy sounds in slumbrous fashion make;              
             At length their owner's fancies they rehearse,        
             And lisp this awesome Poe-em in blank verse:          
                                                                   
                              Aletheia Phrikodes                   
                                                                   
                  Omnia risus et omnia pulvis et omnia nihil.      
                                                                   
             Demoniac clouds, up-pil'd in chasmy reach             
             Of soundless heav'n, smother'd the brooding night;    
             Nor came the wonted whisp'rings of the swamp,         
             Nor voice of autumn wind along the moor,              
             Nor mutter'd noises of th' insomnious grove           
             Whose black recesses never saw the sun.               
             Within that grove a hideous hollow lies,              
             Half bare of trees; a pool in centre lurks            
             That none dares sound; a tarn of murky face,          
             (Though naught can prove its hue, since light of day, 
             Affrighted, shuns the forest-shadow's banks.)         
             Hard by, a yawning hillside grotto breathes           
             From deeps unvisited, a dull, dank air                
             That sears the leaves on certain stunted trees        
             Which stand about, clawing the spectral gloom         
             With evil boughs. To this accursed dell               
             Come woodland creatures, seldom to depart:            
             Once I behold, upon a crumbling stone                 
             Set altar-like before the cave, a thing               
             I saw not clearly, yet from glimpsing, fled.          
             In this half-dusk I meditate alone                    
             At many a weary noontide, when without                
             A world forgets me in its sun-blest mirth.            
             Here howls by night the werewolves, and the souls     
             Of those that knew me well in other days.             
             Yet on this night the grove spake not to me;          
             Nor spake the swamp, nor wind along the moor          
             Nor moan'd the wind about the lonely eaves            
             Of the bleak, haunted pile wherein I lay.             
             I was afraid to sleep, or quench the spark            
             Of the low-burning taper by my couch.                 
             I was afraid when through the vaulted space           
             Of the old tow'r, the clock-ticks died away           
             Into a silence so profound and chill                  
             That my teeth chatter'd - giving yet no sound.        
             Then flicker'd low the light, and all dissolv'd       
             Leaving me floating in the hellish grasp              
             Of body'd blackness, from whose beating wings         
             Came ghoulish blasts of charnel-scented mist.         
             things vague, unseen, unfashion'd, and unnam'd        
             Jostled each other in the seething void               
             That gap'd, chaotic, downward to a sea                
             Of speechless horror, foul with writhing thoughts.    
             All this I felt, and felt the mocking eyes            
             Of the curs's universe upon my soul;                  
             Yet naught I saw nor heard, till flash'd a beam       
             Of lurid lustre through the rotting heav'ns,          
             Playing on scenes I labour'd not to see.              
             Methought the nameless tarn, alight at last,          
             Reflected shapes, and more reveal'd within            
             Those shocking depths that ne'er were seen before;    
             Methought from out the cave a demon train,            
             Grinning and smirking, reel'd in fiendish rout;       
             Bearing within their reeking paws a load              
             Of carrion viands for an impious feast.               
             Methought the stunted trees with hungry arms          
             Grop'd greedily for things I dare not name;           
             The while a stifling, wraith-like noisomeness         
             Fill'd all the dale, and spoke a larger life          
             Of uncorporeal hideousness awake                      
             In the half-sentient wholeness of the spot.           
             Now glow'd the ground, and tarn, and cave, and trees, 
             And moving forms, and things not spoken of,           
             With such a phosphorescence as men glimpse            
             In the putrescent thickets of the swamp               
             Where logs decaying lie, and rankness reigns.         
             Methought a fire-mist drap'd with lucent fold         
             The well-remember'd features of the grove,            
             Whilst whirling ether bore in eddying streams         
             The hot, unfinish'd stuff of nascent worlds           
             Hither and thither through infinity                   
             Of light and darkness, strangely intermix'd;          
             Wherein all entity had consciousness,                 
             Without th' accustom'd outward shape of life.         
             Of these swift circling currents was my soul,         
             Free from the flesh, a true constituent part;         
             Nor felt I less myself, for want of form.             
             Then clear'd the mist, and o'er a star-strown scene   
             Divine and measureless, I gaz'd in awe.               
             Alone in space, I view'd a feeble fleck               
             Of silvern light, marking the narrow ken              
             Which mortals call the boundless universe.            
             On ev'ry side, each as a tiny star,                   
             Shone more creations, vaster than our own,            
             And teeming with unnumber'd forms of life;            
             Though we as life would recognize it not,             
             Being bound to earthy thoughts of human mould.        
             As on a moonless night the Milky Way                  
             In solid sheen displays its countless orbs            
             To weak terrestrial eyes, each orb a sun;             
             So beam'd the prospect on my wond'ring soul;          
             A spangled curtain, rich with twinkling gems,         
             Yet each a mighty universe of suns.                   
             But as I gaz'd, I sens'd a spirit voice               
             In speech didactic, though no voice it was,           
             Save as it carried thought. It bade me mark           
             That all the universes in my view                     
             Form'd but an atom in infinity;                       
             Whose reaches pass the ether-laden realms             
             Of heat and light, extending to far fields            
             Where flourish worlds invisible and vague,            
             Fill'd with strange wisdom and uncanny life,          
             And yet beyond; to myriad spheres of light,           
             To spheres of darkness, to abysmal voids              
             That know the pulses of disorder'd force.             
             Big with these musings, I survey'd the surge          
             Of boundless being, yet I us'd not eyes,              
             For spirit leans not on the props of sense.           
             The docent presence swell'd my strength of soul;      
             All things I knew, but knew with mind alone.          
             Time's endless vista spread before my thought         
             With its vast pageant of unceasing change             
             And sempiternal strife of force and will;             
             I saw the ages flow in stately stream                 
             Past rise and fall of universe and life;              
             I saw the birth of suns and worlds, their death,      
             Their transmutation into limpid flame,                
             Their second birth and second death, their course     
             Perpetual through the aeons' termless flight,         
             Never the same, yet born again to serve               
             The varying purpose of omnipotence.                   
             And whilst I watch'd, I knew each second's space      
             Was greater than the lifetime of our world.           
             Then turn'd my musings to that speck of dust          
             Whereon my form corporeal took its rise;              
             That speck, born but a second, which must die         
             In one brief second more; that fragile earth;         
             That crude experiment; that cosmic sport              
             Which holds our proud, aspiring race of mites         
             And moral vermin; those presuming mites               
             Whom ignorance with empty pomp adorns,                
             And misinstructs in specious dignity;                 
             Those mites who, reas'ning outward, vaunt themselves  
             As the chief work of Nature, and enjoy                
             In fatuous fancy the particular care                  
             Of all her mystic, super-regnant pow'r.               
             And as I strove to vision the sad sphere              
             Which lurk'd, lost in ethereal vortices;              
             Methough my soul, tun'd to the infinite,              
             Refus'd to glimpse that poor atomic blight;           
             That misbegotten accident of space;                   
             That globe of insignificance, whereon                 
             (My guide celestial told me) dwells no part           
             Of empyreal virtue, but where breed                   
             The coarse corruptions of divine disease;             
             The fest'ring ailments of infinity;                   
             The morbid matter by itself call'd man:               
             Such matter (said my guide) as oft breaks forth       
             On broad Creation's fabric, to annoy                  
             For a brief instant, ere assuaging death              
             Heal up the malady its birth provok'd.                
             Sicken'd, I turn'd my heavy thoughts away.            
             Then spake th' ethereal guide with mocking mien,      
             Upbraiding me for searching after Truth;              
             Visiting on my mind the searing scorn                 
             Of mind superior; laughing at the woe                 
             Which rent the vital essence of my soul.              
             Methought he brought remembrance of the time          
             When from my fellows to the grove I stray'd,          
             In solitude and dusk to meditate                      
             On things forbidden, and to pierce the veil           
             Of seeming good and seeming beauteousness             
             That covers o'er the tragedy of Truth,                
             Helping mankind forget his sorry lot,                 
             And raising Hope where Truth would crush it down.     
             He spake, and as he ceas'd, methought the flames      
             Of fuming Heav'n revolv'd in torments dire;           
             Whirling in maelstroms of revellious might,           
             Yet ever bound by laws I fathom'd not.                
             Cycles and epicycles of such girth                    
             That each a cosmos seem'd, dazzled my gaze            
             Till all a wild phantasmal flow became.               
             Now burst athwart the fulgent formlessness            
             A rift of purer sheen, a sight supernal,              
             Broader that all the void conceiv'd by man,           
             Yet narrow here. A glimpse of heav'ns beyond;         
             Of weird creations so remote and great                
             That ev'n my guide assum'd a tone of awe.             
             Borne on the wings of stark immensity,                
             A touch of rhythm celestial reach'd my soul;          
             Thrilling me more with horror than with joy.          
             Again the spirit mock'd my human pangs,               
             And deep revil'd me for presumptuous thoughts;        
             Yet changing now his mien, he bade me scan            
             The wid'ning rift that clave the walls of space;      
             He bade me search it for the ultimate;                
             He bade me find the truth I sought so long;           
             He bade me brave th' unutterable Thing,               
             The final Truth of moving entity.                     
             All this he bade and offer'd - but my soul,           
             Clinging to life, fled without aim or knowledge,      
             Shrieking in silence through the gibbering deeps.     
                                                                   
                                  * * * * * *                      
                                                                   
             Thus shriek'd the young Lucullus, as he fled          
             Through gibbering deeps - and tumbled out of bed;     
             Within the room the morning sunshine gleams,          
             Whilst the poor youth recalls his troubled dreams.    
             He feels his aching limbs, whose woeful pain          
             Informs his soul his body lives again,                
             And thanks his stars - or cosmoses - or such -        
             That he survives the noxious nightmare's clutch.      
             Thrill'd with the music of th' eternal spheres,       
             (Or is it the alarm-clock that he hears?)             
             He vows to all the Pantheon, high and low,            
             No more to feed on cake, or pie, or Poe.              
             And now his gloomy spirits seem to rise,              
             As he the world beholds with clearer eyes;            
             The cup he thought too full of dregs to quaff,        
             Affords him wine enough to raise a laugh.             
             (All this is metaphor - you must not think            
             Our late Endymion prone to stronger drink!)           
             With brighter visage and with lighter heart,          
             He turns his fancies to the grocer's mart;            
             And strange to say, at last he seems to find          
             His daily duties worthy of his mind.                  
             Since Truth prov'd such a high and dang'rous goal,    
             Our bard seeks one less trying to his soul;           
             With deep-drawn breath he flouts his dreary woes,     
             And a good clerk from a bad poet grows!               
             Now close attend my lay, ye scribbling crew           
             That bay the moon in numbers strange and new;         
             That madly for the spark celestial bawl               
             In metres short or long, or none at all;              
             Curb your rash force, in numbers or at tea,           
             Nor over-zealous for high fancies be;                 
             Reflect, ere ye the draught Pierian take,             
             What worthy clerks or plumbers ye might make;         
             Wax not too frenzied in the leaping line              
             That neither sense nor measure can confine,           
             Lest ye, like young Lucullus Launguish, groan         
             Beneath Poe-etic nightmares of your own!              
