Poemata Minora

  Volume II

  by H. P. Lovecraft

                            Published September 1902

                      ------------------------------------

                                     To The
                             Gods, Heros, & Ideals
                                     Of The
                                    ANCIENTS
                         This Volume is Affectionately
                                   DEDICATED
                                       By
                                       A
                                     GREAT
                                    ADMIRER

                      ------------------------------------

       I submit to the publik these idle lines, hoping they will please.
   They form a sort of series, with my Odyssey, Iliad, Aeneid, and the like.

                      ------------------------------------

                             Ode to Selene or Diana                          
                                                                             
    Immortal Moon, in maiden splendour shine;                                
        Dispense thy beams, divine Latona's child.                           
    Thy silver rays all grosser things define,                               
        And hide harsh Truth in sweet illusion mildl.                        
                                                                             
    In thy soft light, the city of unrest                                    
        That stands so squalid in thy brother's glare,                       
    Throws off its habit, and in silence blest,                              
        Becomes a vision, sparkling bright and fair.                         
                                                                             
    The modern world,with all its care and pain                              
        The smokey streets, the loathsome clanging mills,                    
    Face 'neath thy breams, Selene, and again                                
        We dream as shepherds on Chaldea's hills.                            
                                                                             
    Take heed, Diana, of my humble plea;                                     
        Convey me where my happiness can last,                               
    Draw me against the tide of Time's rought sea,                           
        And let my sprirt rest amidst the past.                              
                                                                             
                           To the Old Pagan Religion                         
                                                                             
    Olympian gods! how can I let ye go,                                      
        And pin my faith to this new Christian creed?                        
    Can I resign the deities I know,                                         
        for him who on a cross for man did bleed?                            
                                                                             
    How in my weakness can my hopes depend                                   
        On one lone god, tho' mighty be his pow'r?                           
    Why can Jove's host no more assistance lend,                             
        To Soothe my pain, and cheer my troubled hour?                       
                                                                             
    Are there no dryads on these wooded mounts                               
        O'er which I oft in desolation roam?                                 
    Are there no naiads in these crystal founts                              
        Or nereids upon the ocean foam?                                      
                                                                             
    Fast spreads the new; the older faith declines;                          
        The name of Christ resounds upon the air;                            
    But my wrack'd soul in solitude repines                                  
        And gives the gods their last-received pray'r.                       
                                                                             
                              On the Ruin of Rome                            
                                                                             
    How dost thou lie, O Rome, neath the foot of the Teuton                  
    Slaves are they men, and bent to the will of thy conqueror;              
    Wither hath gone, great city, the race that gave law to all nations,     
    Subdu'd the East and the West, and made them bow down to thy consuls,    
    Knew not defeat, but gave it to all who attack'd thee?                   
                                                                             
    Dead! and replac'd by these wretches who cower in confusion.             
    Dead! they who gave us this empire to guard and to live in,              
    Rome, thou didst fall from thy pow'r with the proud race that made thee, 
    and we, base Italians, enjoy'd what we could not have builded.           
                                                                             
                                     To Pan                                  
                                                                             
    Seated in a woodland glen                                                
    By a shallow stream                                                      
    Once I fell a-musing, when                                               
    I was lull'd into a dream.                                               
                                                                             
    From the brook a shape arose                                             
    Half a man and half a goat,                                              
    Hoofs it had instead of toes                                             
    And a beard adorn'd its throat.                                          
                                                                             
    On a set of rustic reeds                                                 
    Sweetly play'd this hybrid man                                           
    Naught car'd I for earthly needs,                                        
    For I knew that this was Pan.                                            
                                                                             
    Nymphs and Satyrs gather'd round                                         
    To enjoy the lively sound.                                               
                                                                             
    All to soon I woke in pain                                               
    And return'd to haunts of men                                            
    But in rural vales I'd fain                                              
    Live and hear Pan's pipes again                                          
                                                                             
                        On the Vanity of Human Ambition                      
                                                                             
    Apollo, chasing Daphen, claim'd his prize                                
    But lo! she turn'd to wood before his eyes.                              
    More modern swains at golden prizes aim,                                 
    And ever strive some worldly thing to claim,                             
    Yet 'tis the same as in Apollo's case,                                   
    For, once attain'd, the purest gold seems base.                          
    All that men seek's unworthy of the quest,                               
    Yet seek they will, and never pause for rest.                            
    True bliss, methinks, a man can only find                                
    In virtuous life, and cultivated mind.                                   
