The Trap

  by H. P. Lovecraft & Henry S. Whitehead

                               Written late 1931

   It was on a certain Thursday morning in December that the whole thing
   began with that unaccountable motion I thought I saw in my antique
   Copenhagen mirror. Something, it seemed to me, stirred - something
   reflected in the glass, though I was alone in my quarters. I paused and
   looked intently, then, deciding that the effect must be a pure illusion,
   resumed the interrupted brushing of my hair.

   I had discovered the old mirror, covered with dust and cobwebs, in an
   outbuilding of an abandoned estate-house in Santa Cruz's sparsely settled
   Northside territory, and had brought it to the United States from the
   Virgin Islands. The venerable glass was dim from more than two hundred
   years' exposure to a tropical climate, and the graceful ornamentation
   along the top of the gilt frame had been badly smashed. I had had the
   detached pieces set back into the frame before placing it in storage with
   my other belongings.

   Now, several years later, I was staying half as a guest and half as a
   tutor at the private school of my old friend Browne on a windy Connecticut
   hillside - occupying an unused wing in one of the dormitories, where I had
   two rooms and a hallway to myself. The old mirror, stowed securely in
   mattresses, was the first of my possessions to be unpacked on my arrival;
   and I had set it up majestically in the living-room, on top of an old
   rosewood console which had belonged to my great-grandmother.

   The door of my bedroom was just opposite that of the living-room, with a
   hallway between; and I had noticed that by looking into my chiffonier
   glass I could see the larger mirror through the two doorways - which was
   exactly like glancing down an endless, though diminishing, corridor. On
   this Thursday morning I thought I saw a curious suggestion of motion down
   that normally empty corridor - but, as I have said, soon dismissed the
   notion.

   When I reached the dining-room I found everyone complaining of the cold,
   and learned that the school's heating-plant was temporarily out of order.
   Being especially sensitive to low temperatures, I was myself an acute
   sufferer; and at once decided not to brave any freezing schoolroom that
   day. Accordingly I invited my class to come over to my living-room for an
   informal session around my grate-fire - a suggestion which the boys
   received enthusiastically.

   After the session one of the boys, Robert Grandison, asked if he might
   remain; since he had no appointment for the second morning period. I told
   him to stay, and welcome. He sat down to study in front of the fireplace
   in a comfortable chair.

   It was not long, however, before Robert moved to another chair somewhat
   farther away from the freshly replenished blaze, this change bringing him
   directly opposite the old mirror. From my own chair in another part of the
   room I noticed how fixedly he began to look at the dim, cloudy glass, and,
   wondering what so greatly interested him, was reminded of my own
   experience earlier that morning. As time passed he continued to gaze, a
   slight frown knitting his brows.

   At last I quietly asked him what had attracted his attention. Slowly, and
   still wearing the puzzled frown, he looked over and replied rather
   cautiously:

   "It's the corrugations in the glass - or whatever they are, Mr. Canevin. I
   was noticing how they all seem to run from a certain point. Look - I'll
   show you what I mean."

   The boy jumped up, went over to the mirror, and placed his finger on a
   point near its lower left-hand corner.

   "It's right here, sir," he explained, turning to look toward me and
   keeping his finger on the chosen spot.

   His muscular action in turning may have pressed his finger against the
   glass. Suddenly he withdrew his hand as though with some slight effort,
   and with a faintly muttered "Ouch." Then he looked at the glass in obvious
   mystification.

   "What happened?" I asked, rising and approaching.

   "Why - it..." He seemed embarrassed. "It - I - felt - well, as though it
   were pulling my finger into it. Seems - er - perfectly foolish, sir, but -
   well - it was a most peculiar sensation." Robert had an unusual vocabulary
   for his fifteen years.

   I came over and had him show me the exact spot he meant.

   "You'll think I'm rather a fool, sir," he said shamefacedly, "but - well,
   from right here I can't be absolutely sure. From the chair it seemed to be
   clear enough."

   Now thoroughly interested, I sat down in the chair Robert had occupied and
   looked at the spot he selected on the mirror. Instantly the thing "jumped
   out at me." Unmistakably, from that particular angle, all the many whorls
   in the ancient glass appeared to converge like a large number of spread
   strings held in one hand and radiating out in streams.

   Getting up and crossing to the mirror, I could no longer see the curious
   spot. Only from certain angles, apparently, was it visible. Directly
   viewed, that portion of the mirror did not even give back a normal
   reflection - for I could not see my face in it. Manifestly I had a minor
   puzzle on my hands.

   Presently the school gong sounded, and the fascinated Robert Grandison
   departed hurriedly, leaving me alone with my odd little problem in optics.
   I raised several window-shades, crossed the hallway, and sought for the
   spot in the chiffonier mirror's reflection. Finding it readily, I looked
   very intently and thought I again detected something of the "motion." I
   craned my neck, and at last, at a certain angle of vision, the thing again
   "jumped out at me."

   The vague "motion" was now positive and definite - an appearance of
   torsional movement, or of whirling; much like a minute yet intense
   whirlwind or waterspout, or a huddle of autumn leaves dancing circularly
   in an eddy of wind along a level lawn. It was, like the earth's, a double
   motion - around and around, and at the same time inward, as if the whorls
   poured themselves endlessly toward some point inside the glass.
   Fascinated, yet realizing that the thing must be an illusion, I grasped an
   impression of quite distinct suction, and thought of Robert's embarrassed
   explanation: "I felt as though it were pulling my finger into it."

   A kind of slight chill ran suddenly up and down my backbone. There was
   something here distinctly worth looking into. And as the idea of
   investigation came to me, I recalled the rather wistful expression of
   Robert Grandison when the gong called him to class. I remembered how he
   had looked back over his shoulder as he walked obediently out into the
   hallway, and resolved that he should be included in whatever analysis I
   might make of this little mystery.

   Exciting events connected with that same Robert, however, were soon to
   chase all thoughts of the mirror from my consciousness for a time. I was
   away all that afternoon, and did not return to the school until the
   five-fifteen "Call-Over" - a general assembly at which the boys'
   attendance was compulsory. Dropping in at this function with the idea of
   picking Robert up for a session with the mirror, I was astonished and
   pained to find him absent - a very unusual and unaccountable thing in his
   case. That evening Browne told me that the boy had actually disappeared, a
   search in his room, in the gymnasium, and in all other accustomed places
   being unavailing, though all his belongings - including his outdoor
   clothing - were in their proper places.

   He had not been encountered on the ice or with any of the hiking groups
   that afternoon, and telephone calls to all the school-catering merchants
   of the neighborhood were in vain. There was, in short, no record of his
   having been seen since the end of the lesson periods at two-fifteen; when
   he had turned up the stairs toward his room in Dormitory Number Three.

   When the disappearance was fully realized, the resulting sensation was
   tremendous throughout the school. Browne, as headmaster, had to bear the
   brunt of it; and such an unprecedented occurrence in his well-regulated,
   highly organized institution left him quite bewildered. It was learned
   that Robert had not run away to his home in western Pennsylvania, nor did
   any of the searching-parties of boys and masters find any trace of him in
   the snowy countryside around the school. So far as could be seen, he had
   simply vanished.

   Robert's parents arrived on the afternoon of the second day after his
   disappearance. They took their trouble quietly, though, of course, they
   were staggered by this unexpected disaster. Browne looked ten years older
   for it, but there was absolutely nothing that could be done. By the fourth
   day the case had settled down in the opinion of the school as an insoluble
   mystery. Mr. and Mrs. Grandison went reluctantly back to their home, and
   on the following morning the ten days' Christmas vacation began.

   Boys and masters departed in anything but the usual holiday spirit; and
   Browne and his wife were left, along with the servants, as my only
   fellow-occupants of the big place. Without the masters and boys it seemed
   a very hollow shell indeed.

   That afternoon I sat in front of my grate-fire thinking about Robert's
   disappearance and evolving all sorts of fantastic theories to account for
   it. By evening I had acquired a bad headache, and ate a light supper
   accordingly. Then, after a brisk walk around the massed buildings, I
   returned to my living-room and took up the burden of thought once more.

   A little after ten o'clock I awakened in my armchair, stiff and chilled,
   from a doze during which I had let the fire go out. I was physically
   uncomfortable, yet mentally aroused by a peculiar sensation of expectancy
   and possible hope. Of course it had to do with the problem that was
   harassing me. For I had started from that inadvertent nap with a curious,
   persistent idea - the odd idea that a tenuous, hardly recognizable Robert
   Grandison had been trying desperately to communicate with me. I finally
   went to bed with one conviction unreasoningly strong in my mind. Somehow I
   was sure that young Robert Grandison was still alive.

   That I should be receptive of such a notion will not seem strange to those
   who know my long residence in the West Indies and my close contact with
   unexplained happenings there. It will not seem strange, either, that I
   fell asleep with an urgent desire to establish some sort of mental
   communication with the missing boy. Even the most prosaic scientists
   affirm, with Freud, Jung, and Adler, that the subconscious mind is most
   open to external impressions in sleep; though such impressions are seldom
   carried over intact into the waking state.

   Going a step further and granting the existence of telepathic forces, it
   follows that such forces must act most strongly on a sleeper; so that if I
   were ever to get a definite message from Robert, it would be during a
   period of profoundest slumber. Of course, I might lose the message in
   waking; but my aptitude for retaining such things has been sharpened by
   types of mental discipline picked up in various obscure corners of the
   globe.

   I must have dropped asleep instantaneously, and from the vividness of my
   dreams and the absence of wakeful intervals I judge that my sleep was a
   very deep one. It was six-forty-five when I awakened, and there still
   lingered with me certain impressions which I knew were carried over from
   the world of somnolent cerebration. Filling my mind was the vision of
   Robert Grandison strangely transformed to a boy of a dull greenish
   dark-blue color; Robert desperately endeavoring to communicate with me by
   means of speech, yet finding some almost insuperable difficulty in so
   doing. A wall of curious spatial separation seemed to stand between him
   and me - a mysterious, invisible wall which completely baffled us both.

   I had seen Robert as though at some distance, yet queerly enough he seemed
   at the same time to be just beside me. He was both larger and smaller than
   in real life, his apparent size varying directly, instead of inversely,
   with the distance as he advanced and retreated in the course of
   conversation. That is, he grew larger instead of smaller to my eye when he
   stepped away or backwards, and vice versa; as if the laws of perspective
   in his case had been wholly reversed. His aspect was misty and uncertain -
   as if he lacked sharp or permanent outlines; and the anomalies of his
   coloring and clothing baffled me utterly at first.

   At some point in my dream Robert's vocal efforts had finally crystallized
   into audible speech - albeit speech of an abnormal thickness and dullness.
   I could not for a time understand anything he said, and even in the dream
   racked my brain for a clue to where he was, what he wanted to tell, and
   why his utterance was so clumsy and unintelligible. Then little by little
   I began to distinguish words and phrases, the very first of which sufficed
   to throw my dreaming self into the wildest excitement and to establish a
   certain mental connection which had previously refused to take conscious
   form because of the utter incredibility of what it implied.

   I do not know how long I listened to those halting words amidst my deep
   slumber, but hours must have passed while the strangely remote speaker
   struggled on with his tale. There was revealed to me such a circumstance
   as I cannot hope to make others believe without the strongest
   corroborative evidence, yet which I was quite ready to accept as truth -
   both in the dream and after waking - because of my former contacts with
   uncanny things. The boy was obviously watching my face - mobile in
   receptive sleep - as he choked along; for about the time I began to
   comprehend him, his own expression brightened and gave signs of gratitude
   and hope.

   Any attempt to hint at Robert's message, as it lingered in my ears after a
   sudden awakening in the cold, brings this narrative to a point where I
   must choose my words with the greatest care. Everything involved is so
   difficult to record that one tends to flounder helplessly. I have said
   that the revelation established in my mind a certain connection which
   reason had not allowed me to formulate consciously before. This
   connection, I need no longer hesitate to hint, had to do with the old
   Copenhagen mirror whose suggestions of motion had so impressed me on the
   morning of the disappearance, and whose whorl-like contours and apparent
   illusions of suction had later exerted such a disquieting fascination on
   both Robert and me.

   Resolutely, though my outer consciousness had previously rejected what my
   intuition would have liked to imply, it could reject that stupendous
   conception no longer. What was fantasy in the tale of "Alice" now came to
   me as a grave and immediate reality. That looking-glass had indeed
   possessed a malign, abnormal suction; and the struggling speaker in my
   dream made clear the extent to which it violated all the known precedents
   of human experience and all the age-old laws of our three sane dimensions.
   It was more than a mirror - it was a gate; a trap; a link with spatial
   recesses not meant for the denizens of our visible universe, and
   realizable only in terms of the most intricate non-Euclidean mathematics.
   And in some outrageous fashion Robert Grandison had passed out of our ken
   into the glass and was there immured, waiting for release.

   It is significant that upon awakening I harbored no genuine doubt of the
   reality of the revelation. That I had actually held conversation with a
   transdimensional Robert, rather than evoked the whole episode from my
   broodings about his disappearance and about the old illusions of the
   mirror, was as certain to my utmost instincts as any of the instinctive
   certainties commonly recognized as valid.

   The tale thus unfolded to me was of the most incredibly bizarre character.
   As had been clear on the morning of his disappearance, Robert was
   intensely fascinated by the ancient mirror. All through the hours of
   school, he had it in mind to come back to my living-room and examine it
   further. When he did arrive, after the close of the school day, it was
   somewhat later than two-twenty, and I was absent in town. Finding me out
   and knowing that I would not mind, he had come into my living-room and
   gone straight to the mirror; standing before it and studying the place
   where, as we had noted, the whorls appeared to converge.

   Then, quite suddenly, there had come to him an overpowering urge to place
   his hand upon this whorl-center. Almost reluctantly, against his better
   judgment, he had done so; and upon making the contact had felt at once the
   strange, almost painful suction which had perplexed him that morning.
   Immediately thereafter - quite without warning, but with a wrench which
   seemed to twist and tear every bone and muscle in his body and to bulge
   and press and cut at every nerve - he had been abruptly drawn through and
   found himself inside.

   Once through, the excruciatingly painful stress upon his entire system was
   suddenly released. He felt, he said, as though he had just been born - a
   feeling that made itself evident every time he tried to do anything; walk,
   stoop, turn his head, or utter speech. Everything about his body seemed a
   misfit.

   These sensations wore off after a long while, Robert's body becoming an
   organized whole rather than a number of protesting parts. Of all the forms
   of expression, speech remained the most difficult; doubtless because it is
   complicated, bringing into play a number of different organs, muscles, and
   tendons. Robert's feet, on the other hand, were the first members to
   adjust themselves to the new conditions within the glass.

   During the morning hours I rehearsed the whole reason-defying problem;
   correlating everything I had seen and heard, dismissing the natural
   scepticism of a man of sense, and scheming to devise possible plans for
   Robert's release from his incredible prison. As I did so a number of
   originally perplexing points became clear - or at least, clearer - to me.

   There was, for example, the matter of Robert's coloring. His face and
   hands, as I have indicated, were a kind of dull greenish dark-blue; and I
   may add that his familiar blue Norfolk jacket had turned to a pale
   lemon-yellow while his trousers remained a neutral gray as before.
   Reflecting on this after waking, I found the circumstance closely allied
   to the reversal of perspective which made Robert seem to grow larger when
   receding and smaller when approaching. Here, too, was a physical reversal
   - for every detail of his coloring in the unknown dimension was the exact
   reverse or complement of the corresponding color detail in normal life. In
   physics the typical complementary colors are blue and yellow, and red and
   green. These pairs are opposites, and when mixed yield gray. Robert's
   natural color was a pinkish-buff, the opposite of which is the
   greenish-blue I saw. His blue coat had become yellow, while the gray
   trousers remained gray. This latter point baffled me until I remembered
   that gray is itself a mixture of opposites. There is no opposite for gray
   - or rather, it is its own opposite.

   Another clarified point was that pertaining to Robert's curiously dulled
   and thickened speech - as well as to the general awkwardness and sense of
   misfit bodily parts of which he complained. This, at the outset, was a
   puzzle indeed; though after long thought the clue occurred to me. Here
   again was the same reversal which affected perspective and coloration.
   Anyone in the fourth dimension must necessarily be reversed in just this
   way - hands and feet, as well as colors and perspectives, being changed
   about. It would be the same with all the other dual organs, such as
   nostrils, ears, and eyes. Thus Robert had been talking with a reversed
   tongue, teeth, vocal cords, and kindred speech-apparatus; so that his
   difficulties in utterance were little to be wondered at.

   As the morning wore on, my sense of the stark reality and maddening
   urgency of the dream-disclosed situation increased rather than decreased.
   More and more I felt that something must be done, yet realized that I
   could not seek advice or aid. Such a story as mine - a conviction based
   upon mere dreaming - could not conceivably bring me anything but ridicule
   or suspicions as to my mental state. And what, indeed, could I do, aided
   or unaided, with as little working data as my nocturnal impressions had
   provided? I must, I finally recognized, have more information before I
   could even think of a possible plan for releasing Robert. This could come
   only through the receptive conditions of sleep, and it heartened me to
   reflect that according to every probability my telepathic contact would be
   resumed the moment I fell into deep slumber again.

   I accomplished sleeping that afternoon, after a midday dinner at which,
   through rigid self-control, I succeeded in concealing from Browne and his
   wife the tumultuous thoughts that crashed through my mind. Hardly had my
   eyes closed when a dim telepathic image began to appear; and I soon
   realized to my infinite excitement that it was identical with what I had
   seen before. If anything, it was more distinct; and when it began to speak
   I seemed able to grasp a greater proportion of the words.

   During this sleep I found most of the morning's deductions confirmed,
   though the interview was mysteriously cut off long prior to my awakening.
   Robert had seemed apprehensive just before communication ceased, but had
   already told me that in his strange fourth-dimensional prison colors and
   spatial relationships were indeed reversed - black being white, distance
   increasing apparent size, and so on.

   He had also intimated that, notwithstanding his possession of full
   physical form and sensations, most human vital properties seemed curiously
   suspended. Nutriment, for example, was quite unnecessary - a phenomenon
   really more singular than the omnipresent reversal of objects and
   attributes, since the latter was a reasonable and mathematically indicated
   state of things. Another significant piece of information was that the
   only exit from the glass to the world was the entrance-way, and that this
   was permanently barred and impenetrably sealed, so far as egress was
   concerned.

   That night I had another visitation from Robert; nor did such impressions,
   received at odd intervals while I slept receptively minded, cease during
   the entire period of his incarceration. His efforts to communicate were
   desperate and often pitiful; for at times the telepathic bond would
   weaken, while at other times fatigue, excitement, or fear of interruption
   would hamper and thicken his speech. I may as well narrate as a continuous
   whole all that Robert told me throughout the whole series of transient
   mental contacts - perhaps supplementing it at certain points with facts
   directly related after his release. The telepathic information was
   fragmentary and often nearly inarticulate, but I studied it over and over
   during the waking intervals of three intense days; classifying and
   cogitating with feverish diligence, since it was all that I had to go upon
   if the boy were to be brought back into our world.

   The fourth-dimensional region in which Robert found himself was not, as in
   scientific romance, an unknown and infinite realm of strange sights and
   fantastic denizens; but was rather a projection of certain limited parts
   of our own terrestrial sphere within an alien and normally inaccessible
   aspect or direction of space. It was a curiously fragmentary, intangible,
   and heterogeneous world - a series of apparently dissociated scenes
   merging indistinctly one into the other; their constituent details having
   an obviously different status from that of an object drawn into the
   ancient mirror as Robert had been drawn. These scenes were like
   dream-vistas or magic-lantern images - elusive visual impressions of which
   the boy was not really a part, but which formed a sort of panoramic
   background or ethereal environment against which or amidst which he moved.

   He could not touch any of the parts of these scenes - walls, trees,
   furniture, and the like - but whether this was because they were truly
   non-material, or because they always receded at his approach, he was
   singularly unable to determine. Everything seemed fluid, mutable, and
   unreal. When he walked, it appeared to be on whatever lower surface the
   visible scene might have - floor, path, greensward, or such; but upon
   analysis he always found that the contact was an illusion. There was never
   any difference in the resisting force met by his feet - and by his hands
   when he would stoop experimentally - no matter what changes of apparent
   surface might be involved. He could not describe this foundation or
   limiting plane on which he walked as anything more definite than a
   virtually abstract pressure balancing his gravity. Of definite tactile
   distinctiveness it had none, and supplementing it there seemed to be a
   kind of restricted levitational force which accomplished transfers of
   altitude. He could never actually climb stairs, yet would gradually walk
   up from a lower level to a higher.

   Passage from one definite scene to another involved a sort of gliding
   through a region of shadow or blurred focus where the details of each
   scene mingled curiously. All the vistas were distinguished by the absence
   of transient objects, and the indefinite or ambiguous appearance of such
   semi-transient objects as furniture or details of vegetation. The lighting
   of every scene was diffuse and perplexing, and of course the scheme of
   reversed colors - bright red grass, yellow sky with confused black and
   gray cloud-forms, white tree-trunks, and green brick walls - gave to
   everything an air of unbelievable grotesquerie. There was an alteration of
   day and night, which turned out to be a reversal of the normal hours of
   light and darkness at whatever point on the earth the mirror might be
   hanging.

   This seemingly irrelevant diversity of the scenes puzzled Robert until he
   realized that they comprised merely such places as had been reflected for
   long continuous periods in the ancient glass. This also explained the odd
   absence of transient objects, the generally arbitrary boundaries of
   vision, and the fact that all exteriors were framed by the outlines of
   doorways or windows. The glass, it appeared, had power to store up these
   intangible scenes through long exposure; though it could never absorb
   anything corporeally, as Robert had been absorbed, except by a very
   different and particular process.

   But - to me at least - the most incredible aspect of the mad phenomenon
   was the monstrous subversion of our known laws of space involved in the
   relation of various illusory scenes to the actual terrestrial regions
   represented. I have spoken of the glass as storing up the images of these
   regions, but this is really an inexact definition. In truth, each of the
   mirror scenes formed a true and quasi-permanent fourth-dimensional
   projection of the corresponding mundane region; so that whenever Robert
   moved to a certain part of a certain scene, as he moved into the image of
   my room when sending his telepathic messages, he was actually in that
   place itself, on earth - though under spatial conditions which cut off all
   sensory communication, in either direction, between him and the present
   tri-dimensional aspect of the place.

   Theoretically speaking, a prisoner in the glass could in a few moments go
   anywhere on our planet - into any place, that is, which had ever been
   reflected in the mirror's surface. This probably applied even to places
   where the mirror had not hung long enough to produce a clear illusory
   scene; the terrestrial region being then represented by a zone of more or
   less formless shadow. Outside the definite scenes was a seemingly
   limitless waste of neutral gray shadow about which Robert could never be
   certain, and into which he never dared stray far lest he become hopelessly
   lost to the real and mirror worlds alike.

   Among the earliest particulars which Robert gave, was the fact that he was
   not alone in his confinement. Various others, all in antique garb, were in
   there with him - a corpulent middle-aged gentleman with tied queue and
   velvet knee-breeches who spoke English fluently though with a marked
   Scandinavian accent; a rather beautiful small girl with very blonde hair
   which appeared a glossy dark blue; two apparently mute Negroes whose
   features contrasted grotesquely with the pallor of their reversed-colored
   skins; three young men; one young woman; a very small child, almost an
   infant; and a lean, elderly Dane of extremely distinctive aspect and a
   kind of half-malign intellectuality of countenance.

   This last-named individual - Axel Holm, who wore the satin small-clothes,
   flared-skirted coat, and voluminous full-bottomed periwig of an age more
   than two centuries in the past - was notable among the little band as
   being the one responsible for the presence of them all. He it was who,
   skilled equally in the arts of magic and glass working, had long ago
   fashioned this strange dimensional prison in which himself, his slaves,
   and those whom he chose to invite or allure thither were immured
   unchangingly for as long as the mirror might endure.

   Holm was born early in the seventeenth century, and had followed with
   tremendous competence and success the trade of a glass-blower and molder
   in Copenhagen. His glass, especially in the form of large drawing-room
   mirrors, was always at a premium. But the same bold mind which had made
   him the first glazier of Europe also served to carry his interests and
   ambitions far beyond the sphere of mere material craftsmanship. He had
   studied the world around him, and chafed at the limitations of human
   knowledge and capability. Eventually he sought for dark ways to overcome
   those limitations, and gained more success than is good for any mortal. He
   had aspired to enjoy something like eternity, the mirror being his
   provision to secure this end. Serious study of the fourth dimension was
   far from beginning with Einstein in our own era; and Holm, more than
   erudite in all the methods of his day, knew that a bodily entrance into
   that hidden phase of space would prevent him from dying in the ordinary
   physical sense. Research showed him that the principle of reflection
   undoubtedly forms the chief gate to all dimensions beyond our familiar
   three; and chance placed in his hands a small and very ancient glass whose
   cryptic properties he believed he could turn to advantage. Once "inside"
   this mirror according to the method he had envisaged, he felt that "life"
   in the sense of form and consciousness would go on virtually forever,
   provided the mirror could be preserved indefinitely from breakage or
   deterioration.

   Holm made a magnificent mirror, such as would be prized and carefully
   preserved; and in it deftly fused the strange whorl-configured relic he
   had acquired. Having thus prepared his refuge and his trap, he began to
   plan his mode of entrance and conditions of tenancy. He would have with
   him both servitors and companions; and as an experimental beginning he
   sent before him into the glass two dependable Negro slaves brought from
   the West Indies. What his sensations must have been upon beholding this
   first concrete demonstration of his theories, only imagination can
   conceive.

   Undoubtedly a man of his knowledge realized that absence from the outside
   world, if deferred beyond the natural span of life of those within, must
   mean instant dissolution at the first attempt to return to that world.
   But, barring that misfortune or accidental breakage, those within would
   remain forever as they were at the time of entrance. They would never grow
   old, and would need neither food nor drink.

   To make his prison tolerable he sent ahead of him certain books and
   writing materials, a chair and table of stoutest workmanship, and a few
   other accessories. He knew that the images which the glass would reflect
   or absorb would not be tangible, but would merely extend around him like a
   background of dream. His own transition in 1687 was a momentous
   experience; and must have been attended by mixed sensations of triumph and
   terror. Had anything gone wrong, there were frightful possibilities of
   being lost in dark and inconceivable multiple dimensions.

   For over fifty years he had been unable to secure any additions to the
   little company of himself and slaves, but later on he had perfected his
   telepathic method of visualizing small sections of the outside world close
   to the glass, and attracting certain individuals in those areas through
   the mirror's strange entrance. Thus Robert, influenced into a desire to
   press upon the "door," had been lured within. Such visualizations depended
   wholly on telepathy, since no one inside the mirror could see out into the
   world of men.

   It was, in truth, a strange life that Holm and his company had lived
   inside the glass. Since the mirror had stood for fully a century with its
   face to the dusty stone wall of the shed where I found it, Robert was the
   first being to enter this limbo after all that interval. His arrival was a
   gala event, for he brought news of the outside world which must have been
   of the most startling impressiveness to the more thoughtful of those
   within. He, in his turn - young though he was - felt overwhelmingly the
   weirdness of meeting and talking with persons who had been alive in the
   seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

   The deadly monotony of life for the prisoners can only be vaguely
   conjectured. As mentioned, its extensive spatial variety was limited to
   localities which had been reflected in the mirror for long periods; and
   many of these had become dim and strange as tropical climates had made
   inroads on the surface. Certain localities were bright and beautiful, and
   in these the company usually gathered. But no scene could be fully
   satisfying; since the visible objects were all unreal and intangible, and
   often of perplexingly indefinite outline. When the tedious periods of
   darkness came, the general custom was to indulge in memories, reflections,
   or conversations. Each one of that strange, pathetic group had retained
   his or her personality unchanged and unchangeable, since becoming immune
   to the time effects of outside space.

   The number of inanimate objects within the glass, aside from the clothing
   of the prisoners, was very small; being largely limited to the accessories
   Holm had provided for himself. The rest did without even furniture, since
   sleep and fatigue had vanished along with most other vital attributes.
   Such inorganic things as were present, seemed as exempt from decay as the
   living beings. The lower forms of animal life were wholly absent.

   Robert derived most of his information from Herr Thiele, the gentleman who
   spoke English with a Scandinavian accent. This portly Dane had taken a
   fancy to him, and talked at considerable length. The others, too, had
   received him with courtesy and goodwill; Holm himself, seeming
   well-disposed, had told him about various matters including the door of
   the trap.

   The boy, as he told me later, was sensible enough never to attempt
   communication with me when Holm was nearby. Twice, while thus engaged, he
   had seen Holm appear; and had accordingly ceased at once. At no time could
   I see the world behind the mirror's surface. Robert's visual image, which
   included his bodily form and the clothing connected with it, was - like
   the aural image of his halting voice and like his own visualization of
   myself - a case of purely telepathic transmission; and did not involve
   true interdimensional sight. However, had Robert been as trained a
   telepathist as Holm, he might have transmitted a few strong images apart
   from his immediate person.

   Throughout this period of revelation I had, of course, been desperately
   trying to devise a method for Robert's release. On the fourth day - the
   ninth after the disappearance - I hit on a solution. Everything
   considered, my laboriously formulated process was not a very complicated
   one; though I could not tell beforehand how it would work, while the
   possibility of ruinous consequences in case of a slip was appalling. This
   process depended, basically, on the fact that there was no possible exit
   from inside the glass. If Holm and his prisoners were permanently sealed
   in, then release must come wholly from outside. Other considerations
   included the disposal of the other prisoners, if any survived, and
   especially of Axel Holm. What Robert had told me of him was anything but
   reassuring; and I certainly did not wish him loose in my apartment, free
   once more to work his evil will upon the world. The telepathic messages
   had not made fully clear the effect of liberation on those who had entered
   the glass so long ago.

   There was, too, a final though minor problem in case of success - that of
   getting Robert back into the routine of school life without having to
   explain the incredible. In case of failure, it was highly inadvisable to
   have witnesses present at the release operations - and lacking these, I
   simply could not attempt to relate the actual facts if I should succeed.
   Even to me the reality seemed a mad one whenever I let my mind turn from
   the data so compellingly presented in that tense series of dreams.

   When I had thought these problems through as far as possible, I procured a
   large magnifying-glass from the school laboratory and studied minutely
   every square millimeter of that whorl-center which presumably marked the
   extent of the original ancient mirror used by Holm. Even with this aid I
   could not quite trace the exact boundary between the old area and the
   surface added by the Danish wizard; but after a long study decided on a
   conjectural oval boundary which I outlined very precisely with a soft blue
   pencil. I then made a trip to Stamford, where I procured a heavy
   glass-cutting tool; for my primary idea was to remove the ancient and
   magically potent mirror from its later setting.

   My next step was to figure out the best time of day to make the crucial
   experiment. I finally settled on two-thirty a.m. - both because it was a
   good season for uninterrupted work, and because it was the "opposite" of
   two-thirty p.m., the probable moment at which Robert had entered the
   mirror. This form of "oppositeness" may or may not have been relevant, but
   I knew at least that the chosen hour was as good as any - and perhaps
   better than most.

   I finally set to work in the early morning of the eleventh day after the
   disappearance, having drawn all the shades of my living-room and closed
   and locked the door into the hallway. Following with breathless care the
   elliptical line I had traced, I worked around the whorl-section with my
   steel-wheeled cutting tool. The ancient glass, half an inch thick,
   crackled crisply under the firm, uniform pressure; and upon completing the
   circuit I cut around it a second time, crunching the roller more deeply
   into the glass.

   Then, very carefully indeed, I lifted the heavy mirror down from its
   console and leaned it face-inward against the wall; prying off two of the
   thin, narrow boards nailed to the back. With equal caution I smartly
   tapped the cut-around space with the heavy wooden handle of the
   glass-cutter.

   At the very first tap the whorl-containing section of glass dropped out on
   the Bokhara rug beneath. I did not know what might happen, but was keyed
   up for anything, and took a deep involuntary breath. I was on my knees for
   convenience at the moment, with my face quite near the newly made
   aperture; and as I breathed there poured into my nostrils a powerful dusty
   odor - a smell not comparable to any other I have ever encountered. Then
   everything within my range of vision suddenly turned to a dull gray before
   my failing eyesight as I felt myself overpowered by an invisible force
   which robbed my muscles of their power to function.

   I remember grasping weakly and futilely at the edge of the nearest window
   drapery and feeling it rip loose from its fastening. Then I sank slowly to
   the floor as the darkness of oblivion passed over me.

   When I regained consciousness I was lying on the Bokhara rug with my legs
   held unaccountably up in the air. The room was full of that hideous and
   inexplicable dusty smell - and as my eyes began to take in definite images
   I saw that Robert Grandison stood in front of me. It was he - fully in the
   flesh and with his coloring normal - who was holding my legs aloft to
   bring the blood back to my head as the school's first-aid course had
   taught him to do with persons who had fainted. For a moment I was struck
   mute by the stifling odor and by a bewilderment which quickly merged into
   a sense of triumph. Then I found myself able to move and speak
   collectedly.

   I raised a tentative hand and waved feebly at Robert.

   "All right, old man," I murmured, "you can let my legs down now. Many
   thanks. I'm all right again, I think. It was the smell - I imagine - that
   got me. Open that farthest window, please - wide - from the bottom. That's
   it - thanks. No - leave the shade down the way it was."

   I struggled to my feet, my disturbed circulation adjusting itself in
   waves, and stood upright hanging to the back of a big chair. I was still
   "groggy," but a blast of fresh, bitterly cold air from the window revived
   me rapidly. I sat down in the big chair and looked at Robert, now walking
   toward me.

   "First," I said hurriedly, "tell me, Robert - those others - Holm? What
   happened to them, when I - opened the exit?"

   Robert paused half-way across the room and looked at me very gravely.

   "I saw them fade away - into nothingness - Mr. Canevin," he said with
   solemnity; "and with them - everything. There isn't any more 'inside,' sir
   - thank God, and you, sir!"

   And young Robert, at last yielding to the sustained strain which he had
   borne through all those terrible eleven days, suddenly broke down like a
   little child and began to weep hysterically in great, stifling, dry sobs.

   I picked him up and placed him gently on my davenport, threw a rug over
   him, sat down by his side, and put a calming hand on his forehead.

   "Take it easy, old fellow," I said soothingly.

   The boy's sudden and very natural hysteria passed as quickly as it had
   come on as I talked to him reassuringly about my plans for his quiet
   restoration to the school. The interest of the situation and the need of
   concealing the incredible truth beneath a rational explanation took hold
   of his imagination as I had expected; and at last he sat up eagerly,
   telling the details of his release and listening to the instructions I had
   thought out. He had, it seems, been in the "projected area" of my bedroom
   when I opened the way back, and had emerged in that actual room - hardly
   realizing that he was "out." Upon hearing a fall in the living-room he had
   hastened thither, finding me on the rug in my fainting spell.

   I need mention only briefly my method of restoring Robert in a seemingly
   normal way - how I smuggled him out of the window in an old hat and
   sweater of mine, took him down the road in my quietly started car, coached
   him carefully in a tale I had devised, and returned to arouse Browne with
   the news of his discovery. He had, I explained, been walking alone on the
   afternoon of his disappearance; and had been offered a motor ride by two
   young men who, as a joke and over his protests that he could go no farther
   than Stamford and back, had begun to carry him past that town. Jumping
   from the car during a traffic stop with the intention of hitch-hiking back
   before Call-Over, he had been hit by another car just as the traffic was
   released - awakening ten days later in the Greenwich home of the people
   who had hit him. On learning the date, I added, he had immediately
   telephoned the school; and I, being the only one awake, had answered the
   call and hurried after him in my car without stopping to notify anyone.

   Browne, who at once telephoned to Robert's parents, accepted my story
   without question; and forbore to interrogate the boy because of the
   latter's manifest exhaustion. It was arranged that he should remain at the
   school for a rest, under the expert care of Mrs. Browne, a former trained
   nurse. I naturally saw a good deal of him during the remainder of the
   Christmas vacation, and was thus enabled to fill in certain gaps in his
   fragmentary dream-story.

   Now and then we would almost doubt the actuality of what had occurred;
   wondering whether we had not both shared some monstrous delusion born of
   the mirror's glittering hypnotism, and whether the tale of the ride and
   accident were not after all the real truth. But whenever we did so we
   would be brought back to belief by some monstrous and haunting memory;
   with me, of Robert's dream-figure and its thick voice and inverted colors;
   with him, of the whole fantastic pageantry of ancient people and dead
   scenes that he had witnessed. And then there was that joint recollection
   of that damnable dusty odor. . . . We knew what it meant: the instant
   dissolution of those who had entered an alien dimension a century and more
   ago.

   There are, in addition, at least two lines of rather more positive
   evidence; one of which comes through my researches in Danish annals
   concerning the sorcerer, Axel Holm. Such a person, indeed, left many
   traces in folklore and written records; and diligent library sessions,
   plus conferences with various learned Danes, have shed much more light on
   his evil fame. At present I need say only that the Copenhagen glass-blower
   - born in 1612 - was a notorious Luciferian whose pursuits and final
   vanishing formed a matter of awed debate over two centuries ago. He had
   burned with a desire to know all things and to conquer every limitation of
   mankind - to which end he had delved deeply into occult and forbidden
   fields ever since he was a child.

   He was commonly held to have joined a coven of the dreaded witch-cult, and
   the vast lore of ancient Scandinavian myth - with its Loki the Sly One and
   the accursed Fenris-Wolf - was soon an open book to him. He had strange
   interests and objectives, few of which were definitely known, but some of
   which were recognized as intolerably evil. It is recorded that his two
   Negro helpers, originally slaves from the Danish West Indies, had become
   mute soon after their acquisition by him; and that they had disappeared
   not long before his own disappearance from the ken of mankind.

   Near the close of an already long life the idea of a glass of immortality
   appears to have entered his mind. That he had acquired an enchanted mirror
   of inconceivable antiquity was a matter of common whispering; it being
   alleged that he had purloined it from a fellow-sorcerer who had entrusted
   it to him for polishing.

   This mirror - according to popular tales a trophy as potent in its way as
   the better-known Aegis of Minerva or Hammer of Thor - was a small oval
   object called "Loki's Glass," made of some polished fusible mineral and
   having magical properties which included the divination of the immediate
   future and the power to show the possessor his enemies. That it had deeper
   potential properties, realizable in the hands of an erudite magician, none
   of the common people doubted; and even educated persons attached much
   fearful importance to Holm's rumored attempts to incorporate it in a
   larger glass of immortality. Then had come the wizard's disappearance in
   1687, and the final sale and dispersal of his goods amidst a growing cloud
   of fantastic legendry. It was, altogether, just such a story as one would
   laugh at if possessed of no particular key; yet to me, remembering those
   dream messages and having Robert Grandison's corroboration before me, it
   formed a positive confirmation of all the bewildering marvels that had
   been unfolded.

   But as I have said, there is still another line of rather positive
   evidence - of a very different character - at my disposal. Two days after
   his release, as Robert, greatly improved in strength and appearance, was
   placing a log on my living-room fire, I noticed a certain awkwardness in
   his motions and was struck by a persistent idea. Summoning him to my desk
   I suddenly asked him to pick up an ink-stand - and was scarcely surprised
   to note that, despite lifelong right-handedness, he obeyed unconsciously
   with his left hand. Without alarming him, I then asked that he unbutton
   his coat and let me listen to his cardiac action. What I found upon
   placing my ear to his chest - and what I did not tell him for some time
   afterward - was that his heart was beating on his right side.

   He had gone into the glass right-handed and with all organs in their
   normal positions. Now he was left-handed and with organs reversed, and
   would doubtless continue so for the rest of his life. Clearly, the
   dimensional transition had been no illusion - for this physical change was
   tangible and unmistakable. Had there been a natural exit from the glass,
   Robert would probably have undergone a thorough re-reversal and emerged in
   perfect normality - as indeed the color-scheme of his body and clothing
   did emerge. The forcible nature of his release, however, undoubtedly set
   something awry; so that dimensions no longer had a chance to right
   themselves as chromatic wave-frequencies still did.

   I had not merely opened Holm's trap; I had destroyed it; and at the
   particular stage of destruction marked by Robert's escape some of the
   reversing properties had perished. It is significant that in escaping
   Robert had felt no pain comparable to that experienced in entering. Had
   the destruction been still more sudden, I shiver to think of the
   monstrosities of color the boy would always have been forced to bear. I
   may add that after discovering Robert's reversal I examined the rumpled
   and discarded clothing he had worn in the glass, and found, as I had
   expected, a complete reversal of pockets, buttons, and all other
   corresponding details.

   At this moment Loki's Glass, just as it fell on my Bokhara rug from the
   now patched and harmless mirror, weighs down a sheaf of papers on my
   writing-table here in St. Thomas, venerable capital of the Danish West
   Indies - now the American Virgin Islands. Various collectors of old
   Sandwich glass have mistaken it for an odd bit of that early American
   product - but I privately realize that my paper-weight is an antique of
   far subtler and more paleogean craftsmanship. Still, I do not disillusion
   such enthusiasts.

   The Lovecraft Library wishes to extend its gratitude to Pytheon for
   transcribing this text. 
