Waste Paper: A Poem of Profound Insignificance

  by H. P. Lovecraft

  Written 1922

                                       I                                     
                                                                             
    Out of the reaches of illimitable night                                  
    The blazing planet grew, and forc'd to life                              
    Unending cycles of progressive strife                                    
    And strange mutations of undying light                                   
    And boresome books, than hell's own self more trite                      
    And thoughts repeated and become a blight,                               
    And cheap rum-hounds with moonshine hootch made tight,                   
    And quite contrite to see the flight of fright so bright                 
    I used to ride my bicycle in the night                                   
    With a dandy acetylene lantern that cost $3.00                           
    In the evening, by the moonlight, you can hear those darkies singing     
    Meet me tonight - in dreamland... BAH!                                   
    I used to sit on the stairs of the house where I was born                
    After we left it but before it was sold                                  
    And play on a zobo with two other boys.                                  
    We called ourselves the Blackstone Military Band                         
    Won't you come home, Bill Bailey, won't you come home?                   
    In the spring of the year, in the silver rain                            
    When petal by petal the blossoms fall                                    
    And the mocking birds call                                               
    And the whippoorwill sings, Marguerite.                                  
    The first cinema show in our town opened in 1906                         
    At the old Olympic, which was then call'd Park,                          
    And moving beams shot weirdly thro' the dark                             
    And spit tobacco seldom hit the mark.                                    
    Have you read Dickens' American Notes?                                   
    My great-great-grandfather was born in a white house                     
    Under green trees in the country                                         
    And he used to believe in religion and the weather.                      
                                                                             
                                       II                                    
                                                                             
    "Shantih, shantih, shantih"..."Shanty House"                             
    Was the name of a novel by I forget whom                                 
    Published serially in the "All-Story Weekly"                             
    Before it was a weekly. Advt.                                            
    Disillusion is wonderful, I've been told,                                
    And I take quinine to stop a cold                                        
    But it makes my ears... always...                                        
    Always ringing in my ears...                                             
    It is the ghost of the Jew I murdered that Christmas day                 
    Because he played "Three O'Clock in the Morning" in the flat above me... 
    Three O'Clock in the morning, I've danc'd the whole night through        
    Dancing on the graves in the graveyard                                   
    Where life is buried; life and beauty                                    
    Life and art and love and duty                                           
    Ah, there, sweet cutie.                                                  
    Stung!                                                                   
    Out of the night that covers me                                          
    Black as the pit from pole to pole                                       
    I never quote things straight except by accident.                        
    Sophistication! Sophistication!                                          
    You are the idol of our nation                                           
    Each fellow has                                                          
    Fallen for jazz                                                          
    And we'll give the past a merry razz                                     
    Thro' the ghoul-guarded gateways of slumber                              
    And fellow-guestship with the glutless worm.                             
    Next stop is 57th St. - 57th St. the next stop.                          
    Achilles' wrath, to Greece the direful spring,                           
    And the governor-general of Canada is Lord Byng                          
    Whose ancestor was shot or hung,                                         
    I forget which, the good die young.                                      
    Here's to your ripe old age,                                             
    Copyright, 1847, by Joseph Miner,                                        
    Entered according to act of Congress.                                    
                                                                             
                                      III                                    
                                                                             
    In the office of the librarian of Congress                               
    America was discovered in 1492                                           
    This way out.                                                            
    No, lady, you gotta change at Washington St. to the Everett train.       
    Out in the rain on the elevated                                          
    Crated, sated, all mismated.                                             
    Twelve seats on this bench,                                              
    How quaint.                                                              
    In a shady nook, beside a brook, two lovers stroll along.                
    Express to Park Ave., Car Following.                                     
    No, we had it cleaned with the sand blast.                               
    I know it ought to be torn down.                                         
    Before the bar of a saloon there stood a reckless crew,                  
    When one said to another, "Jack, this message came for you."             
    "It may be from a sweetheart, boys," said someone in the crowd,          
    And here the words are missing... but Jack cried out aloud:              
    "It's only a message from home, sweet home,                              
    From loved ones down on the farm                                         
    Fond wife and mother, sister and brother..."                             
    Bootleggers all and you're another                                       
    In the shade of the old apple tree                                       
    'Neath the old cherry tree sweet Marie                                   
    The Conchologist's First Book                                            
    By Edgar Allan Poe                                                       
    Stubbed his toe                                                          
    On a broken brick that didn't show                                       
    Or a banana peel                                                         
    In the fifth reel                                                        
    By George Creel                                                          
    It is to laugh                                                           
    And quaff                                                                
    It makes you stout and hale                                              
    And all my days I'll sing the praise                                     
    Of Ivory Soap                                                            
    Have you a little T. S. Eliot in your house?                             
                                                                             
                                       IV                                    
                                                                             
    The stag at eve had drunk his fill                                       
    The thirsty hart look'd up the hill                                      
    And craned his neck just as a feeler                                     
    To advertise the Double-Dealer.                                          
    William Congreve was a gentleman                                         
    O art what sins are committed in thy name                                
    For tawdry fame and fleeting flame                                       
    And everything, ain't dat a shame?                                       
    Mah Creole Belle, ah lubs yo' well;                                      
    Aroun' mah heart you hab cast a spell                                    
    But I can't learn to spell pseudocracy                                   
    Because there ain't no such word.                                        
    And I says to Lizzie, if Joe was my feller                               
    I'd teach him to go to dances with that                                  
    Rat, bat, cat, hat, flat, plat, fat                                      
    Fry the fat, fat the fry                                                 
    You'll be a drug-store by and by.                                        
    Get the hook!                                                            
    Above the lines of brooding hills                                        
    Rose spires that reeked of nameless ills,                                
    And ghastly shone upon the sight                                         
    In ev'ry flash of lurid light                                            
    To be continued.                                                         
    No smoking.                                                              
    Smoking on four rear seats.                                              
    Fare win return to 5 cents after August 1st                              
    Except outside the Cleveland city limits.                                
    In the ghoul-haunted Woodland of Weir                                    
    Strangers pause to shed a tear;                                          
    Henry Fielding wrote "Tom Jones"                                         
    And cursed be he that moves my bones.                                    
    I saw the Leonard-Tendler fight                                          
    Farewell, farewell, O go to hell.                                        
    Nobody home                                                              
    In the shantih.                                                          

   This poem is a parody of T. S. Elliot's The Waste Land, and mondernist
   poetry in general, which Lovecraft referred to as a "practically
   meaningless collection of phrases, learned allusions, quotations, slang,
   and scraps in general."
