Winged Death

  by H. P. Lovecraft and Hazel Heald

                                  Written 1933

            Published March 1934 in Weird Tales, 23, No. 3, 299-315.

   THE Orange Hotel stands in High Street near the railway station in
   Bloemfontein, South Africa.  On Sunday, January 24, 1932, four men sat
   shivering from terror in a room on its third floor.  One was George C.
   Titteridge, proprietor of the hotel; another was police constable Ian De
   Witt of the Central Sation; a third was Johannes Bogaert, the local
   coroner; the fourth, and apparently the least disorganized of the group,
   was Doctor Cornelius Van Keulen, the coroner's physician.

   On the floor, uncomfortably evident amid the stifling summer heat, was the
   body of a dead man--but this was not what the four were afraid of.  Their
   glances wandered from the table, on which lay a curious assortment of
   things, to the ceiling overhead, across whose smooth whiteness a series of
   huge, faltering alphabetical characters had somehow been scrawled in ink;
   and every now and then Doctor Van Keulen would glance half furtively at a
   worn leather blank-book, the scrawled words on the ceiling, and a dead fly
   of peculiar aspect which floated in a bottle of ammonia on the table. 
   Also on the table were an open inkwell, a pen and writing-pad, a
   physician's medical case, a bottle of hydrochloric acid, and a tumbler
   about a quarter full of black oxide of manganese.

   The worn leather book was the journal of the dead man on the floor, and
   had at once made clear that the name Frederick N. Mason, Mining
   Properties, Toronto, Canada, signed in the hotel register, was a false
   one.  There were other things--terrible things--which it likewise made
   clear; and still other things of far greater terror at which it hinted
   hideously without making them clear or even fully believable.  It was the
   half-belief of the four men, fostered by lives spent close to the black,
   settled secrets of brooding Africa, which made them shiver so violently in
   spite of the searing January heat.

   The blank-book was not a large one, and the entries were in a fine
   handwriting, which, however, grew careless and nervous-looking toward the
   last.  It consisted of a series of jottings at first rather irregularly
   spaced, but finally becoming daily.  To call it a diary would not be quite
   correct, for it chronicled only one set of its writer's activities. 
   Doctor Van Keulen recognized the name of the dead man the moment he opened
   the cover, for it was that of an eminent member of his own profession who
   had been largely connected with African matters.  In another moment he was
   horrified to find his name linked with a dastardly crime officially
   unsolved, which had filled the newspapers some four months before.  And
   the farther he read, the deeper grew his horror, awe, and sense of
   loathing and panic.

   Here, in essence, is the text which the doctor read aloud in that sinister
   and increasingly noisome room while the three men around him breathed
   hard, fidgeted in their chairs, and darted frightened glances at the
   ceiling, the table, the things on the floor, and one another:

                                   JOUNRAL OF
                            THOMAS SLAUENWITE, M.D.

   Touching punishment of Henry Sargent Moore, Ph.D., of Brooklyn, New York,
   Professor of Invertebrate Biology in Columbia University, New York, N.Y. 
   Prepared to be read after my death, for the satisfaction of making public
   the accomplishment of my revenge, which may otherwise never be imputed to
   me even if it succeeds.

   January 5, 1929--I have now fully resolved to kill Doctor Henry Moore, and
   a recent incident has shown me how I shall do it.  From now on, I shall
   follow a consistent line of action; hence the beginning of this journal.

   It is hardly necessary to repeat the circumstances which have driven me to
   this course, for the informed part of the public is familiar with all the
   salient facts.  I was born in Trenton, New Jersey, on April 12, 1885, the
   son of Doctor Paul Slauenwite, formerly of Pretoria, Transvaal, South
   Africa.  Studying medicine as part of my family tradition, I was led by my
   father (who died in 1916, while I was serving in France in a South African
   regiment) to specialize in African fevers; and after my graduation from
   Columbia spent much time in researches which took me from Durban, in
   Natal, up to the equator itself.

   In Mombasa I worked out my new theory of the transmission and development
   of remittent fever, aided only slightly by the papers of the late
   government physician, Sir Norman Sloane, which I found in the house I
   occupied.  When I published my results I became at a single stroke a
   famous authority.  I was told of the probability of an almost supreme
   position in the South African health service, and even a probable
   knighthood, in the event of my becoming a naturalized citizen, and
   accordingly I took the necessary steps.

   Then occurred the incident for which I am about to kill Henry Moore.  This
   man, my classmate and friend of years in America and Africa, chose
   deliberately to undermine my claim to my own theory; alleging that Sir
   Norman Sloane had anticipated me in every essential detail, and implying
   that I had probably found more of his papers than I had stated in my
   account of the matter.  To buttress this absurd accusation he produced
   certain personal letters from Sir Norman which indeed showed that the
   older man had been over my ground, and that he would have published his
   results very soon but for his sudden death.  This much I could only admit
   with regret.  What I could not excuse was the jealous suspicion that I had
   stolen the theory from Sir Norman's papers.  The British government,
   sensibly enough, ignored these aspersions, but witheld the half-promised
   appointment and knighthood on the ground that my theory, while original
   with me, was not in fact new.

   I could see that my career in Africa perceptibly checked; though I had
   placed all my hopes on such a career, even to the point of resigning
   American citizenship.  A distinct coolness toward me had arisien among the
   Government set in Mombasa, especially among those who had known Sir
   Norman.  It was then that I resolved to be even with Moore sooner or
   later, though I did not know how.  He had been jealous of my early
   celebrity, and had taken advantage of his old correspondence with Sir
   Norman to ruin me.  This from the friend whom I had myself led to take an
   interest in Africa--whom I had coached and inspired till he achieved his
   present moderate fame as an authority on African entomology.  Even now,
   though, I will not deny that his attainments are profound.  I made him,
   and in return he has ruined me.  Now--some day--I shall destroy him.

   When I saw myself losing ground in Mombasa, I applied for my present
   situation in the interior--at M'gonga, only fifty miles from the Uganda
   line.  It is a cotton and ivory trading-post, with only eight white men
   besides myself.  A beastly hole, almost on the equator, and full of every
   sort of fever known to mankind.  Poisonous snakes and insects everywhere,
   and niggers with diseases nobody ever hears of outside medical college. 
   But my work is not hard, and I have plenty of time to plan things to do to
   Henry Moore.  It amuses me to give his Diptera of Central and Southern
   Africa a prominent place on my shelf.  I suppose it actually is a standard
   manual--they use it at Columbia, Harvard, and Wisconsin--but my own
   suggestions are really responsible for half its strong points.

   Last week I encountered the thing which decided me how to kill Moore.  A
   party from Uganda brought in a black with a queer illness which I can't
   yet diagnose.  He was lethargic, with a very low temperature, and shuffled
   in a peculiar way.  Most of the others were afraid of him and said he was
   under some kind of witch-doctor spell; but Gobo, the interpreter, said he
   had been bitten by an insect.  What it was, I can't imagine--for there is
   only a slight puncture on the arm.  It is bright red, though, with a
   purple ring around it.  Spectral-looking--I don't wonder the boys lay it
   to black magic.  They seem to have seen cases like it before, and say
   there's really nothing to do about it.

   Old N'Kora, one of the Galla boys at the post, says it must be the bite of
   a devil-fly, which makes its victim waste away gradually and die, and then
   takes hold of his soul and personality if it is still alive itself--flying
   around with all his likes, dislikes and consciousness.  A queer
   legend--and I don't know of any local insect deadly enough to account for
   it.  I gave this sick black--his name is Mevana--a good shot of quinine
   and took a sample of his blood for testing, but haven't made much
   progress.  There certainly is a strange germ present, but I can't even
   remotely identify it.  The nearest thing to it is the bacillus one finds
   in oxen, horses and dogs that the tsetse fly has bitten; but tsetse-flies
   non't infect human beings, and this is too far north for them anyway.

   However--the important thing is that I've decided how to kill Moore.  If
   this interior region has insects as poisonous as the natives say, I'll see
   that he gets a shipment of them from a source he won't suspect, and with
   plenty of assurances that they are harmless.  Trust him to throw overboard
   all caution when it comes to studying an unknown species--and then we'll
   see how nature takes its course!  It ought not to be hard to find an
   insect that scares the blacks so much.  First to see how poor Mevana turns
   out--and then to find my envoy of death.

   Jan. 7--Mevana is no better, though I have injected all the antitoxins I
   know of.  He has fits of trembling, in which he rants affrightedly about
   the way his soul will pass when he dies into the insect that bit him, but
   between them he remains in a kind of half-stupor.  Heart action still
   strong, so I may pull him through.  I shall try to, for he can probably
   guide me better than anyone to the region where he was bitten.

   Meanwhile I'll write to Doctor Lincoln, my predecessor here, for Allen,
   the head factor, says he had a profound knowledge of the local
   sicknesses.  He ought to know about the death-fly if any white man does. 
   He's at Nairobi now, and a black runner ought to get me a reply in a
   week--using the railway for half the trip.

   Jan. 10--Patient unchanged, but I have found what I want!  It was in an
   old volume of the local health records which I've been going over
   diligently while waiting to hear from Lincoln.  Thirty years ago there was
   an epidemic that killed off thousands of natives in Uganda, and it was
   definitely traced to a rare fly called Glossina palpalis--a sort of cousin
   of the Glossina norsitans, or tsetse.  It lives in the bushes on the
   shores of lakes and rivers, and feeds on the blood of crocodiles,
   antelops, and large mammals.  When these food animals have the germ of
   trypanosomiasis, or sleeping-sickness, it picks it up and develops acute
   infectivity after an incubation period of thirty-one days.  Then for
   seventy-five days it is sure death to anyone or anything it bites.

   Without doubt, this must be the "devil-fly" the niggers talk about.  Now I
   know what I'm heading for.  Hope Mevana pulls through.  Ought to hear from
   Lincoln in four or five days--he has a great reputation for success in
   things like this.  My worst problem will be to get the flies to Moore
   without his recognizing them.  With his cursed plodding scholarship it
   would be just like him to know all about them since they're actually on
   record.

                                       II

   Jan. 15--Just heard from Lincoln, who confirms all that the records say
   about Glossina palpalis.  He has a remedy for sleeping-sickness which has
   succeeded in a great number of cases when not given too late. 
   Intermuscular injections of tryparsamide.  Since Mevana was bitten about
   two months ago, I don't know how it will work--but Lincoln says cases have
   been known to drag on eighteen months, so possibly I'm not too late. 
   Lincoln sent over some of his stuff, so I've just given Mevana a stiff
   shot.  In a stupor now.  They've brought his principal wife from the
   village, but he doesn't even recognize her.  If he recovers, he can
   certainly show me where the flies are.  He's a great crocodile hunter,
   according to report, and knows all Uganda like a book.  I'll give him
   another shot tomorrow.

   Jan. 16--Mevana seems a little brighter today, but his heart action is
   slowing up a bit.  I'll keep up the injections, but not overdo them.

   Jan. 17--Recovery really pronounced today.  Mevana opened his eyes and
   showed signs of actual consciousness, though dazed, after the injection. 
   Hope Moore doesn't know about the tryparsamide.  There's a good chance he
   won't, since he never leaned much toward medicine.  Mevana's tongue seems
   paralyzed, but I fancy that will pass off it I can only wake him up. 
   Wouldn't mind a good sleep myself, but not of this kind!

   Jan. 25--Mevana nearly cured!  In another week I can let him take me into
   the jungle.  He was frightened when he first came to--about having the fly
   take his personality after he died--but brightened up finally when I told
   him he was going to get well.  His wife, Ugowe, takes good care of him
   now, and I can rest a bit.  Then for the envoys of death!

   Feb. 3--Mevana is well now, and I have talked with him about a hunt for
   flies.  He dreads to go near the place where they got him, but I am
   playing on his graditude.  Besides, he has an idea that I can ward off
   disease as well as cure it.  His pluck would shame a white man--there's no
   doubt that he'll go.  I can get off by telling the head factor the trip is
   in the interest of local health work.

   March 12--In Uganda at last!  Have five boys beside Mevana, but they are
   all Gallas.  The local black couldn't be hired to come near the region
   after the talk of what had happened to Mevana.  This jungle is a
   pestilential place--steaming with miasmal vapors.  All the lakes look
   stagnat.  In one spot we came upon a trace of Cyclopean ruins which made
   even the Gallas run past in a wide circle.  They say these megaliths are
   older than man, and that they used to be a haunt or outpost of "The
   Fishers from Outside"--whatever that means--and of the evil Gods Tsadogwa
   and Clulu.  To this day they are said to have a malign influence, and to
   be connected somehow with the devil-flies.

   March 15--Struck Lake Mlolo this morning--where Mevana was bitten.  A
   hellish, green-scummed affair, full of crocodiles.  Mevana has fixed up a
   flytrap of fine wire netting baited with crocodile meat.  It has a small
   entrance, and once the quarry get in, they don't know enough to get out. 
   As stupid as they are deadly, and ravenous for fresh meat or a bowl of
   blood.  Hope we can get a good supply.  I've decided that I must
   experiment with them--finding a way to change their appearance so that
   Moore won't recognize them.  Possibly I can cross them with some other
   species, producing a strange hybrid whose infection-carrying capacity will
   be undiminished.  We'll see.  I must wait, but am in no hurry now.  When I
   get ready I'll have Mevana get me some infected meat to feed my envoys of
   death--and then for the post-office.  Ought to be no trouble getting
   infection, for this country is a veritable pest-hole.

   March 16--Good luck.  Two cages full.  Five vigorous specimens with wings
   glistening like diamonds.  Mevana is emptying them into a large can with a
   tightly meshed top, and I think we caught them in the nick of time.  We
   can get them to M'gonga without trouble.  Taking plenty of crocodile meat
   for their food.  Undoubtedly all or most of it is infected.

   April 20--Back at M'gonga and busy in the laboratory.  Have sent to Doctor
   Joost in Pretoria for some tsetse flies for hybridization experiments. 
   Such a crossing, if it will work at all, ought to produce something pretty
   hard to recognize yet at the same time just as deadly as the palpalis.  If
   this doesn't work, I shall try certain other diptera from the interior,
   and I have sent to Doctor Vandervelde at Nyangwe for some of the Congo
   types.  I shan't have to send Mevana for more tainted meat after all; for
   I find I can keep cultures of the germ trypanosoma gambiense, taken from
   the meat we got last month, almost indefinitely in tubes.  When the times
   comes, I'll taint some fresh meat and feed my winged envoys a good
   dose--then bon voyage to them!

   June 18--My tsetse flies from Joost came today.  Cages for breeding were
   all ready long ago, and I am now making selections.  Intend to use
   ultra-violet rays to speed up the life-cycle.  Fortunately I have the
   needed apparatus in my regular equipment.  Naturally I tell no one what
   I'm doing.  The ignorance of the few men here makes it easy for me to
   conceal my aims and pretend to be merely studying existing species for
   medical reasons.

   June 29--The crossing is fertile!  Good deposists of eggs last Wednesday,
   and now I have some excellent larvae.  If the mature insects look as
   strange as these do, I need do nothing more.  Am preparing separate
   numbered cages for the different specimens.

   July 7--New hybrids are out!  Disguise is excellent as to shape, but sheen
   of wings still suggests palpalis.  Thorax has faint suggestions of the
   stripes of the tsetse.  Slight variation in individuals.  Am feeding them
   all on tained crocodile meat, and after infectivity develops will try them
   on some of the blacks--apparently, of course, by accident.  There are so
   many mildly venemous flies around here that it can easily be done without
   exciting suspicion.  I shall loose an insect in my tightly screened
   dining-room when Batta, my house-boy, brings in breakfast--keeping well on
   guard myself.  When it has done its work I'll capture or swat it--an easy
   thing because of its stupidity--or asphyxiate it by filling the room with
   chlorine gas.  If it doesn't work the first time, I'll try again until it
   does.  Of course, I'll have the tryparsamide handy in case I get bitten
   myself--but I shall be careful to avoid biting, for no antidote is really
   certain.

   Aug. 10--Infectivity mature, and managed to get Batta stung in fine
   shape.  Caught the fly on him, returning it to its cage.  Eased up the
   pain with iodine, and the poor devil is quite grateful for the service. 
   Shall try a variant specimen on Gamba, the factor's messenger tomorrow. 
   That will be all the tests I shall dare to make here, but if I need more I
   shall take some specimens to Ukala and get additional data.

   Aug. 11--Failed to get Gamba, but recaptured the fly alive.  Batta still
   seems well as usual, and has no pain in the back where he was stung. 
   Shall wait before trying to get Gamba again.

   Aug. 14--Shipment of insects from Vandervelde at last.  Fully seven
   distinct species, some more or less poisonous.  Am keeping them well fed
   in case the tsetse crossing doesn't work.  Some of these fellows look very
   unlike the palpalis, but the trouble is that they may not make a fertile
   cross with it.

   Aug. 17--Got Gamba this afternoon, but had to kill the fly on him.  It
   nipped him in the left shoulder.  I dressed the bite, and Gamba is as
   grateful as Batta was.  No change in Batta.

   Aug. 20--Gamba unchanged so far--Batta too.  Am experimenting with a new
   form of disguise to supplement the hybrization--some sort of dye to change
   the telltale glitter of the palpalis' wings.  A blueish tint would be
   best--something I could spray on a whole batch of insects.  Shall begin by
   investigating things like Prussian and Turnbull's blue--iron and cyanogen
   salts.

   Aug. 25--Batta complained of a pain in his back today--things may be
   developing.

   Sept. 3--Have made fair progress in my experiments.  Batta shows signs of
   lethargy, and says his back aches all the time.  Gamba beginning to feel
   uneasy in his bitten shoulder.

   Sept. 24--Batta worse and worse, and beginning to get frightened about his
   bit.  Thinks it must be a devil-fly, and entreated me to kill it--for he
   saw me cage it--until I pretended that it had died long ago.  Said he
   didn't want his soul to pass into it upon his death.  I give him shots of
   plain water with a hypodermic to keep his morale up.  Evidently the fly
   retains all the properties of the palpalis.  Gamba down, too, and
   repeating all of Batta's symptoms.  I may decide to give him a chance with
   tryparsamide, for the effect of the fly is proved well enough.  I shall
   let Batta go on, however, for I want a rough idea of how long it takes to
   finish a case.

   Dye experiments coming along nicely.  An isomeric form of ferrous
   ferro-cyanide, can be dissolved in alcohol and sprayed on the insects with
   splendid effect.  It stains the wings blue without affecting the dark
   thorax much, and doesn't wear off when I sprinkle the specimens with
   water.  With this disguise, I think I can use the present tsetse hybrids
   and avoid bothering with any more experiments.  Sharp as he is, Moore
   couldn't recognize a blue-winged fly with a half-tsetse thorax.  Of course
   I keep all this dye business strictly under cover.  Nothing must ever
   connect me with the blue flies later on.

   Oct. 9--Batta is lethargic and has taken to his bed.  Have been giving
   Gamba tryparsamide for two weeks, and fancy he'll recover.

   Oct. 25--Batta very low, but Gamba nearly well.

   Nov. 18--Batta died yesterday, and a curious thing happened which gave me
   a real shiver in view of the native legends and Batta's own fears.  When I
   returned to the laboratory after the death I heard the most singular
   buzzing and thrashing in cage 12, which contained the fly that bit Batta. 
   The creature seemed frantic, but stopped still when I appeared--lighting
   on the wire netting and looking at me in the oddest way.  It reached its
   legs through the eyes as if it were bewildered.  When I came back from
   dining with Allen, the thing was dead.  Evidently it had gone wild and
   beaten its life out on the sides of the cage.

   It certainly is peculiar that this should happen just as Batta died.  If
   any black had seen it, he'd have laid it at once to the absorption of the
   poor devil's soul.  I shall start my blue-stained hybrids on their way
   before long now.  The hybrid's rate of killing seems a little ahead of the
   pure palpalis' rate, if anything.  Batta died three months and eight days
   after infection--but of course there is always a wide margin of
   uncertainty.  I almost wish I had let Gamba's case run on.

   Dec. 5--Busy planning how to get my envoys to Moore.  I must have them
   appear to come from some disinterested entomologist who has read his
   Diptera of Central and Southern Africa and believes he would like to study
   this "new and unidentifiable species."  There must also be ample
   assurances that the blue-winged fly is harmless, as proved by the natives'
   long experience.  Moore will be off his guard, and one of the flies will
   surely get him sooner or later--though one can't tell just when.

   I'll have to rely on the letters of New York friends--they still speak of
   Moore from time to time--to keep me informed of early results, though I
   dare say the papers will announce his death.  Above all, I must show now
   interest in his case.  I shall mail the flies while on a trip, but must
   not be recognized when I do it.  The best plan will be to take a long
   vacation in the interior, grow a beard, mail the package at Ukala while
   passing as a visiting entomologist, and return here after shaving off the
   beard.

   April 12, 1930--Back in M'gonga after my long trip.  Everything has come
   off finely--with clockwork precision.  Have sent the flies to Moore
   without leaving a trace.  Got a Christmas vacation Dec. 15th, and set out
   at once with the proper stuff.  Made a very good mailing container with
   room to include some germ-tainted crocodile meat as food for the envoys. 
   By the end of February I had beard enough to shape into a close Vandyke.

   Showed up at Ukala March 9th and typed a letter to Moore on the
   trading-post machine.  Signed it "Nevil Wayland-Hall"--supposed to be an
   entomologyist from London.  Think I took the right tone--interest of a
   brother-scientist, and all that.  Was artistically casual in emphasizing
   the "complete harmlessness" of the specimens.  Nobody suspected anything. 
   Shaved the beard as soon as I hit the bush, so there wouldn't be any
   uneven tanning by the time I got back here.  Dispensed with native bearers
   except for one small stretch of swamp--I can do wonders with one knapsack,
   and my sense of direction is good.  Luckily I'm used to such travelling. 
   Explained my protracted absence by pleading a touch of fever and some
   mistakes in direction when going through the bush.

   But now comes the hardest part psychologically--waiting for news of Moore
   without showing the strain.  Of course, he may possibly escape a bite
   until the venom is played out--but with his recklessness the chances are
   one hundred to one against him.  I have no regrets; after what he did to
   me, he deserves this and more.

   June 30, 1930--Hurrah!  The first step worked!  Just heard casually from
   Dyson of Columbia that Moore had received some new blue-winged flies from
   Africa, and that he is badly puzzled over them!  No word of any bite--but
   if I know Moore's slipshod ways as I think I do, there'll be one before
   long.

   August 27, 1930--Letter from Morton in Cambridge.  He says Moore writes of
   feeling very run-down, and tells of an insect bite on the back of his
   neck--from a curious new specimen that he received about the middle of
   June.  Have I succeeded?  Apparently Moore doesn't connect the bite with
   his weakness.  If this is the real stuff, then Moore was bitten well
   within the insect's period of infectivity.

   Sept. 12, 1930--Victory!  Another line from Dyson says that Moore is
   really in an alarming shape.  He now traces his illness to the bite, which
   he received around noon on June 19, and is quite bewildered about the
   identity of the insect.  Is trying to get in touch with the "Nevil
   Wayland-Hall" who sent him the shipment.  Of the hundred-odd that I sent,
   about twenty-five seem to have reached him alive.  Some escaped at the
   time fo the bite, but several larvae have appeared from eggs laid since
   the time of mailing.  He is, Dyson says, carefully incubating these
   larvae.  When they mature I suppose he'll identify the tsetse-palpalis
   hybridization--but that won't do him much good now.  He'll wonder, though,
   why the blue wings aren't transmitted by heredity!

   Nov. 8, 1930--Letters from half a dozen friends tell of Moore's serious
   illness.  Dyson's came today.  He says Moore is utterly at sea about the
   hybrids that came from the larvae and is beginning to think that the
   parents got their blue wings in some artificial way.  Has to stay in bed
   most of the time now.  No mention of using tryparsamide.

   Feb. 13, 1931--Not so good!  Moore is sinking, and seems to know no
   remedy, but I think he suspects one.  Had a very chilly letter from Morton
   last month, which told nothing of Moore; and now Dyson writes--also rather
   constrainedly--that Moore is forming theories about the whole matter. 
   He's been making a search for "Wayland-Hall" by telegraph--at London,
   Ukala, Nairobi, Mombasa, and other places--and of course finds nothing.  I
   judge that he's told Dyson whom he suspects, but that Dyson doesn't
   believe it yet.  Fear Morton does believe it.

   I see that I'd better lay plans for getting out of here and effacing my
   identity for good.  What an end to a career that started out so well! 
   More of Moore's work--but this time he's paying for it in advance! 
   Believe I'll go back to South Africa--and meanwhile will quietly deposit
   funds there to the credit of my new self--"Frederick Nasmyth Mason of
   Toronto, Canada, broker in mining properties."  Will establish a new
   signature for identification.  If I never have to take the step, I can
   easily re-transfer the funds to my present self.

   Aug. 15, 1931--Half a year gone, and still suspense.  Dyson and Morton--as
   well as several other friends--seem to have stopped writing me.  Doctor
   James of San Francisco hears from Moore's friends now and then, and says
   Moore is in an almost continuous coma.  He hasn't been able to walk since
   May.  As long as he could talk he complained of being cold.  Now he can't
   talk, though it is thought he still has glimmers of consciousness.  His
   breathing is short and quick, and can be heard some distance away.  Now
   question but the trypanosoma gambiense is feeding on him--but he holds out
   better than the niggers around here.  Three months and eight days finished
   Batta and here Moore is alive over a year after his biting.  Heard rumors
   last month of an intensive search around Ukala for "Wayland-Hall."  Don't
   think I need to worry yet, though, for there's absolutely nothing in
   existence to link me with this business.

   Oct. 7, 1931--It's over at last!  News in the Mombasa Gazette.  Moore died
   September 20 after a series of trembling fits and with a temperature
   vastly below normal.  So much for that!  I said I'd get him, and I did! 
   The paper has a three-column report of his long illness and death, and of
   the futile search for "Wayland-Hall."  Obviously, Moore was a bigger
   character in Africa than I had realized.  The insect that bit him has now
   been fully identified from the surviving specimens and developed larvae,
   and the wing-staining is also detected.  It is universally realized that
   the flies were prepared and shipped with intent to kill.  Moore, it
   appears, communicated certain suspicions to Dyson, but the latter--and the
   police--are maintaining secrecy because of absence of proof.  All of
   Moore's enemies are being looked up, and the Associated Press hints that
   "an investigation, possibly involving an eminent physician now abroad,
   will follow."

   One thing at the very end of the report--undoubtedly the cheap romancing
   of a yellow journalist--gives me a curious shudder in view of the legends
   of the blacks and the way the fly happened to go wild when Batta died.  It
   seems that an odd incident occurred on the night of Moore's death; Dyson
   having been aroused by the buzzing of a blue-winged fly--which immediately
   flew out the window--just before the nurse telephoned the death news from
   Moore's home, miles away in Brooklyn.

   But what concerns me most is the African end of the matter.  People at
   Ukala remember the bearded stranger who typed the letter and sent the
   package, and the constabulary are combing the country for any blacks who
   may have carried him.  I didn't use many, but if officers question the
   Ubandes who took me through N'Kini jungle belt I'll have to explain more
   than I like.  It looks as if the time has come for me to vanish; so
   tomorrow I believe I'll resign and prepare to start for parts unknown.

   Nov. 9, 1931--Hard work getting my resignation acted on, but release came
   today.  I didn't want to aggravate suspicion by decamping outright.  Last
   week I heard from James about Moore's death--but nothing more than is in
   the papers.  Those around him in New York seem rather reticent about
   details, though they all talk about a searching investigation.  No word
   from any of my friends in the East.  Moore must have spread some dangerous
   suspicions around before he lost consciousness--but there isn't an iota of
   proof he could have adduced.

   Still, I am taking no chances.  On Thursday I shall start for Mombasa, and
   when there will take a steamer down the coast to Durban.  After that I
   shall drop from sight--but soon afterward the mining properties broker
   Frederick Nasmyth Mason, from Toronto, will turn up in Johannesburg.

   Let this be the end of my journal.  If in the end I am not suspected, it
   will serve its original purpose after my death and reveal what would not
   otherwise be known.  If, on the other hand, these suspicions do
   materialize and persist, it will confirm and clarify the vague charges,
   and fill in many important and puzzling gaps.  Of course, if danger comes
   my way I shall have to destroy it.

   Well, Moore is dead--as he amply deserves to be.  Now Doctor Thomas
   Slauenwite is dead, too.  And when the body formerly belonging to Thomas
   Slauenwite is dead, the public may have this record.

                                      III

   Jan. 15, 1932--A new year--and a reluctant reopening of this journal. 
   This time I am writing solely to relieve my mind, for it would be absurd
   to fancy that the case is not definitely closed.  I am settled in the Vaal
   Hotel, Johannesburg, under my new name, and no one has so far challenged
   my identity.  Have had some inconclusive business talks to keep up my part
   as a mine broker, and believe I may actually work myself into that
   business.  Later I shall go to Toronto and plant a few evidences for my
   fictitious past.

   But what is bothering me is an insect that invaded my room around noon
   today.  Of course I have had all sorts of nightmares about blue flies of
   late, but those were only to be expected in view of my prevailing nervous
   strain.  This thing, however, was a waking actuality, and I am utterly at
   a loss to account for it.  It buzzed around my bookshelf for fully a
   quarter of an hour, and eluded every attempt to catch or kill it.  The
   queerest thing was its color and aspect--for it had blue wings and was in
   every way a duplicate of my hybrid envoys of death.  How it could possibly
   be one of these in fact, I certainly don't know.  I disposed of all the
   hybrids--stained and unstained--that I didn't send to Moore, and can't
   recall any instance of escape.

   Can this be wholly an hallucination?  Or could any of the specimens that
   escaped in Brooklyn when Moore was bitten have found their way back to
   Africa?  There was that absurd story of the fly that waked Dyson when
   Moore died--but after all, the survival and return of some of the things
   is not impossible.  It is perfectly plausible that the blue should stick
   to their wings, for the pigment I devised was almost as good as tattooing
   for permanence.  By elimination, that would seem to be the only rational
   explanation for this thing; though it is very curious that the fellow has
   come as far south as this.  Possibly its some hereditary homing instinct
   inherent in the tsetse strain.  After all, that side of him belongs to
   South Africa.

   I must be on my guard against a bite.  Of course the original venom--if
   this is actually one of the flies that escaped from Moore--was worn out
   ages ago; but the fellow must have fed as he flew back from America, and
   he may well have come through Central Africa and picked up a fresh
   infectivity.  Indeed, that's more probable than not; for the palpalis half
   of his heredity would naturally take him back to Uganda, and all the
   trypanosomiasis germs.  I still have some of the tryparsamide left--I
   couldn't bear to destroy my medicine case, incriminating though it may
   be--but since reading up on the subject I am not so sure about the drug's
   action as I was.  It gives one a fighting chance--certainly it saved
   Gamba--but there's always a large probability of failure.

   It's devilish queer that this fly should have happened to come into my
   room--of all places in the wide expanse of Africa!  Seems to strain
   coincidence to breaking point.  I suppose that if it comes again, I shall
   certainly kill it.  I'm surprised that it escaped me today, for ordinarily
   these fellows are extremely stupid and easy to catch.  Can it be a pure
   illusion after all?  Certainly the heat is getting me of late as it never
   did before--even up around Uganda.

   Jan. 16--Am I going insane?  The fly came up again this noon, and acted so
   anomalously that I can't make head or tail of it.  Only delusion on my
   part could account for what that buzzing pest seemed to do.  It appeared
   from nowhere, and went straight to my bookshelf--circling again and again
   to front a copy of Moore's Diptera of Central and Southern Africa.  Now
   and then it would light on top or back of the volume, and occasionally it
   would dart forward toward me and retreat before I could strike at it with
   a folded paper.  Such cunning is unheard of among the notoriously stupid
   African diptera.  For nearly half an hour I tried to get the cursed thing,
   but at last it darted out the window through a hole in the screen that I
   hadn't noticed.  At times I fancied it deliberately mocked me by coming
   within reach of my weapon and then skilfully sidestepping as I struck
   out.  I must keep a tight hold of my consciousness.

   Jan. 17--Either I am mad or the world is in the grip of some sudden
   suspension of the laws of probability as we know them.  That damnable fly
   came in from somewhere just before noon and commenced buzzing around the
   copy of Moore's Diptera on my shelf.  Again I tried to catch it, and again
   yesterday's experience was repeated.  Finally the pest made for the open
   inkwell on my table and dipped itself in--just the legs and thorax,
   keeping its wings clear.  Then it sailed up to the ceiling and
   lit--beginning to crawl around in a curved patch and leaving a trail of
   ink.  After a time it hopped a bit and made a single ink spot unconnected
   with the trail--until it dropped squarely in front of my face, and buzzed
   out of sight before I could get it.

   Something about this whole business struck me as monstrously sinister and
   abnormal--more so than I could explain to myself.  When I looked at the
   ink-trail on the ceiling from different angles, it seemed more and more
   familiar to me, and it dawned on me suddenly that it formed an absolutely
   perfect questionmark.  What device could be more malignly appropriate?  It
   is a wonder that I did not faint.  So far the hotel attendants have not
   noticed it.  Have not seen the fly this afternoon and evening, but am
   keeping my inkwell securely closed.  I think my extermination of Moore
   must be preying on me, and giving me morbid hallucinations.  Perhaps there
   is no fly at all.

   Jan. 18--Into what strange hell of living nightmare am I plunged?  What
   occurred today is something which could not normally happen--and yet an
   hotel attendant has seen the marks on the ceiling and concedes their
   reality.  About 11 o'clock this morning, as I was writing on a manuscript,
   something darted down to the inkwell for a second and flashed aloft again
   before I could see what it was.  Looking up, I saw that hellish fly on the
   ceiling as it had been before--crawling along and tracing another trail of
   curves and turns.  There was nothing I could do, but I folded a newspaper
   in readiness to get the creature if it should fly near enough.  When it
   had made several turns on the ceiling it flew into a dark corner and
   disappeared, and as I looked upward at the doubly defaced plastering I saw
   that the new ink-trail was that of a huge and unmistakable figure 5!

   For a time I was almost unconscious from a wave of nameless menace for
   which I could not fully account.  Then I summoned up my resolution and
   took an active step.  Going out to a chemist's shop I purchased some gum
   and other things necessary for preparing a sticky trap--also a duplicate
   inkwell.  Returning to my room, I filled the new inkwell with the sticky
   mixture and set it where the old one had been, leaving it open.  Then I
   tried to concentrate my mind on some reading.  About 3 o'clock I heard the
   accursed insect again, and saw it circling around the new inkwell.  It
   descended to the sticky surface but did not touch it, and afterward sailed
   straight toward me--retreating before I could hit it.  Then it went to the
   bookshelf and circled around Moore's treatise.  There is something
   profound and diabolic about the way the intruder hovers near that book.

   The worst part was the last.  Leaving Moore's book, the insect flew over
   to the open window and began beating itself rhythmically against the wire
   screen.  There would be a series of beats and then a series of equal
   length and another pause, and so on.  Something about this performance
   held me motionless for a couple of moments, but after that I went over to
   the window and tried to kill the noxious thing.  As usual, no use.  It
   merely flew across the room to a lamp and began beating the same tattoo on
   the stiff cardboard shade.  I felt a vague desperation and proceeded to
   shut all the doors as well as the window whose screen had the
   imperceptible hole.  It seemed very necessary to kill this persistent
   being, whose hounding was rapidly unseating my mind.  Then, unconsciously
   counting, I began to notice that each of its series of beatings contained
   jus five strokes.

   Five--the same number that the thing had traced in ink on the ceiling in
   the morning!  Could there be any conceivable connection?  The notion was
   maniacal, for that would argue a human intellect and a knowledge of
   written figures in the hybrid fly.  A human intellect--did that not take
   one back to the most primitive legends of the Uganda blacks?  And yet
   there was that infernal cleverness in eluding me as contrasted with the
   normal stupidity of the breed.  As I laid aside my folded paper and sat
   down in growing horror, the insect buzzed aloft and disappeared through a
   hole in the ceiling where the radiator pipe went to the room above.

   The departure did not soothe me, for my mind had started on a train of
   wild and terrible reflections.  If this fly had a human intelligence,
   where did that intelligence come from?  Was there any truth in the native
   notion that these creatures acquire the personality of their victims after
   the latters' death?  If so, whose personality did this fly bear?  I had
   reasoned out that it must be one of those which escaped from Moore at the
   time he was bitten.  Was this the envoy of death which had bitten Moore? 
   If so, what did it want with me?  What did it want with me anyway?  In a
   cold perspiration I remembered the actions of the fly that had bitten
   Batta when Batta died.  Had its own personality been displaced by that of
   its dead victim?  Then there was that sensational news account of the fly
   that waked Dyson when Moore died.  As for that fly that was hounding
   me--could it be that a vindictive human personality drove it on?  How it
   hovered around Moore's book!--I refused to think any farther than that. 
   All at once I began to feel sure that the creature was indeed infected,
   and in the most virulent way.  With a malign deliberation so evident in
   every act, it must surely have charged itself on purpose with the
   deadliest bacilli in all Africa.  My mind, thoroughly shaken, was now
   taking the thing's human qualities for granted.

   I now telephoned the clerk and asked for a man to stop up the radiator
   pipehole and other possible chinks in my room.  I spoke of being tormented
   by flies, and he seemed to be quite sympathetic.  When the man came, I
   showed him the inkmarks on the ceiling, which he recognized without
   difficulty.  So they are real!  The resemblance to a questionmark and a
   figure five puzzled and fascinated him.  In the end he stopped up all the
   holes he could find, and mended the window-screen, so that I can now keep
   both windows open.  He evidently thought me a bit eccentric, especially
   since no insects were in sight while he was here.  But I am past minding
   that.  So far the fly has not appeared this evening.  God knows what it
   is, what it wants, or what will become of me!

   Jan. 19--I am utterly engulfed in horror.  The thing has touched me. 
   Something monstrous and demoniac is at work around me, and I am a helpless
   victim.  In the morning, when I returned from breakfast, that winged fiend
   from hell brushed into the room over my head, and began beating itself
   against the window-screen as it did yesterday.  This time, though, each
   series of beats contained only four strokes.  I rushed to the window and
   tried to catch it, but it escaped as usual and flew over to Moore's
   treatise, where it buzzed around mockingly.  Its vocal equipment is
   limited, but I noticed that its spells of buzzing came in groups of four.

   By this time I was certainly mad, for I called out to it "Moore, Moore,
   for God's sake, what do you want?"  When I did so, the creature suddenly
   ceased its circling, flew toward me, and made a low, graceful dip in the
   air, somehow suggestive of a bow.  Then it flew back to the book.  At
   least, I seemed to see it do this--though I am trusting my senses no
   longer.

   And then the worst thing happened.  I had left my door open, hoping the
   monster would leave if I could not catch it; but about 11:30 I shut the
   door, concluding it had gone.  Then I settled down to read.  Just at noon
   I felt a tickling on the back of my neck, but when I put my hand up
   nothing was there.  In a moment I felt the tickling again--and before I
   could move, that nameless spawn of hell sailed into view from behind, did
   another of those mocking, graceful dips in the air, and flew out through
   the key-hole--which I never dreamed was large enough to allow its passage.

   That the thing had touched me, I could not doubt.  It had touched me
   without injuring me--and then I remembered in a sudden cold fright that
   Moore had been bitten on the back of the neck at noon.  No invasion since
   then--but I have stuffed all the keyholes with paper and shall have a
   folded paper ready for use whenever I open the door to leave or enter.

   Jan. 20--I can not yet believe fully in the supernatural, yet I fear none
   the less that I am lost.  The business is too much for me.  Just before
   noon today that devil appeared outside the window and repeated its beating
   operations; but this time in series of three.  When I went to the window
   it flew out of sight.  I still have resolution enough to take one more
   defensive step.  Removing both window-screens, I coated them with my stick
   preparation--the one I used in the ink-well--outside and inside, and set
   them back in place.  If that creature attempts another tattoo, it will be
   its last!

   Rest of the day in peace.  Can I weather this experience without becoming
   a maniac?

   Jan. 21--On board train for Bloemfontein.

   I am routed.  The thing is winning.  It has a diabolic intelligence
   against which all my devices are powerless.  It appeared outside the
   window this morning, but did not touch the sticky screen.  Instead it
   sheared off without lighting and began buzzing around in circles--two at a
   time, followed by a pause in the air.  After several of these performances
   it flew off out of sight over the roofs of the city.  My nerves are just
   at the breaking-point, for these suggestions of numbers are capable of a
   hideous interpretation.  Monday the thing dwelt on the figure five;
   Tuesday it was four; Wednesday it was three; and now today it is two. 
   Five, four, three, two--what can this be save come monstrous and
   unthinkable counting-off of days?   For what purpose, only the evil powers
   of the universe can know.  I spent all the afternoon packing and arranging
   my trunks, and now I have taken the night express for Bloemfontein. 
   Flight may be useless, but what else can one do?

   Jan. 22--Settled at the Orange Hotel, Bloemfontein--a comfortable and
   excellent place--but the horror followed me.  I had shut all the doors and
   windows, stopped all the keyholes, looked for any possible chinks, and
   pulled down all the shades--but just before noon I heard a dull tap on one
   of the window-screens.  I waited--and after a long pause another tap
   came.  A second pause, and still another single tap.  Raising the shade, I
   saw that accursed fly, as I had expected.  It described one large, slow
   circle in the air, and then flew out of sight.  I was left as weak as a
   rag, and had to rest on the couch.  One!  This was clearly the burden of
   the monster's present message.  One tap, one circle.  Did this mean one
   more day for me before some unthinkable doom?  Ought I to flee again, or
   entrench myself here by sealing up the room?

   After an hour's rest I felt able to act, and ordered a large reserve
   supply of canned and packaged food--also linen and towels--sent in. 
   Tomorrow I shall not under any circumstances open any crevice of door or
   window.  When the food and linen came the black looked at me queerly, but
   I no longer care how eccentric--or insane--I may appear.  I am hounded by
   powers worse than the ridicule of mankind.  Having received my supplies, I
   went over every square millimeter of the walls, and stopped up every
   microscopic opening I could find.  At last I feel able to get some sleep.

 (Handwriting here becomes irregular, nervous, and very difficult to decipher.)

   Jan. 23--It is just before noon, and I feel that something very terrible
   is about to happen.  Didn't sleep as late as I expected, even though I got
   almost no sleep on the train the night before.  Up early, and have had
   trouble getting concentrated on anything--reading or writing.  That slow,
   deliberate counting-off of days is too much for me.  I don't know which
   has gone wild--nature or my head.  Until about eleven I did very little
   except walk up and down the room.

   Then I heard a rustle among the food packages brought in yesterday, and
   that demoniac fly crawled out before my eyes.  I grabbed something flat
   and made passes at the thing despite my panic fear, but with no more
   effect than usual.  As I advance, that blue-winged horror retreated as
   usual to the table where I had piled my books, and lit for a second on
   Moore's Diptera of Central and Southern Africa.  Then as I followed, it
   flew over to the mantel clock and lit on the dial near the figure 12. 
   Before I could think up another move it had begun to crawl around the dial
   very slowly and deliberately--in the direction of the hands.  It passed
   under the minute hand, curved down and up, passed under the hour hand, and
   finally came to a stop exactly at the figure 12.  As it hovered there it
   fluttered its wings with a buzzing noise.

   Is this a portent of some sort?  I am getting as superstitious as the
   blacks.  The hour is now a little after eleven.  Is twelve the end?  I
   have just one last resort, brought to my mind through utter desperation. 
   Recalling that my medicine case contains both of the substances necessary
   to generate chlorine gas, I have resolved to fill the room with that
   lethal vapor--asphyxiating the fly while protecting myself with an
   ammonia-sealed handkerchief tied over my face.  Fortunately I have a good
   supply of ammonia.  This crude mask will probably neutralize the acrid
   chlorine fumes till the insect is dead--or at least helpless enough to
   crush.  But I must be quick.  How can I be sure that the thing will not
   suddenly dart for me before my preparations are complete?  I ought not to
   be stopping to write in this journal.

   Later--Both chemicals--hydrochloric acid and manganese dioxide--on the
   table ready to mix.  I've tied the handkerchief over my nose and mouth,
   and have a bottle of ammonia ready to keep it soaked until the chlorine is
   gone.  Have battened down both windows.  But I don't like the actions of
   that hybrid demon.  It stays on the clock, but is very slowly crawling
   around backward from the 12 mark to meet the gradually advancing minute
   hand.

   Is this to be my last entry in this journal?  It would be useless to try
   to deny what I suspect.  Too often a grain of incredible truth lurks
   behind the wildest and most fantastic of legends.  Is the personality of
   Henry Moore trying to get at me through this blue-winged devil?  Is this
   the fly that bit him, and that in consequence absorbed his personality
   when he died?  If so, and if it bites me, will my own personality displace
   Moore's and enter that buzzing body when I die of the bite later on? 
   Perhaps, though, I need not die even if it gets me.  There is always a
   chance with tryparsamide.  And I regret nothing.  Moore had to die, be the
   outcome what it will.

                                Slightly later.

   The fly has paused on the clock-dial near the 45-minute mark.  It is now
   11:30.  I am saturating the handkerchief over my face with ammonia, and
   keeping the bottle handy for further applications.  This will be the final
   entry before I mix the acid and manganese and liberate the chlorine.  I
   ought not to be losing time, but it steadies me to get things down on
   paper.  But for this record, I'd have lost all my reason long ago.  The
   fly seems to be getting restless, and the minute-hand is approaching it. 
   Now for the cholrine. . . .

                              (End of the journal)

   On Sunday, Jan. 24, 1932, after repeated knocking had failed to gain any
   response from the eccentric man in Room 303 of the Orange Hotel, a black
   attendant entered with a pass key and at once fled shrieking downstairs to
   tell the clerk what he had found.  The clerk, after notifying the police,
   summoned the manager; and the latter accompanied Constable De Witt,
   Coroner Bogaert, and Doctor Van Keulen to the fatal room.

   The occupant lay dead on the floor--his face upward, and bound with a
   handkerchief which smelled strongly of ammonia.  Under this covering the
   features showed an expression of stark, utter fear which transmitted
   itself to the observers.  On the back of the neck Doctor Van Keulen found
   a virulent insect bite--dark red, with a purple ring around it--which
   suggested a tsetse fly or something less innocuous.  An examination
   indicated that death must be due to heart-failure induced by sheer fright
   rather than to the bite--though a subsequent autopsy indicated that the
   germ of trypanosomiasis had been introduced into the system.

   On the table were several objects--a worn leather blankbook containing the
   journal just described, a pen, writing-pad, and open inkwell, a doctor's
   medicine case with the initials "T. S." marked in gold, bottles of ammonia
   and hydrochloric acid, and a tumbler about a quarter full of black
   manganese dioxide.  The ammonia bottle demanded a second look because
   something besides the fluid seemed to be in it.  Looking closer, Coroner
   Bogaert saw that the alien occupant was a fly.

   It seemed to be some sort of hybrid with vague tsetse affiliations, but
   its wings--showing faintly blue despite the action of the strong
   ammonia--were a complete puzzle.  Something about it waked a faint memory
   of a newspaper reading in Doctor Van Keulen--a memory which the journal
   was soon to confirm.  Its lower parts seemed to have been stained with
   ink, so thoroughly that even the ammonia had not bleached them.  Possibly
   it had fallen at one time into the inkwell, though the wings were
   untouched.  But how had it managed to fall into the narrow-necked ammonia
   bottle?  It was as if the creature had deliberately crawled in and
   committed suicide!

   But the strangest thing of all was what Constable De Witt noticed on the
   smooth white ceiling overhead as his eyes roved about curiously.  At his
   cry the other three followed his gaze--even Doctor Van Keulen, who had for
   some time been thumbing through the worn leather book with an expression
   of mixed horror, fascination, and incredulity.  The thing on the ceiling
   was a series of shaky, straggling ink-tracks, such as might have been made
   by the crawling of some ink-drenched insect.  At once every one thought of
   the stains on the fly so oddly found in the ammonia-bottle.

   But these were no ordinary ink-tracks.  Even a first glance revealed
   something hauntingly familiar about them, and closer inspection brought
   gasps of startled wonder from all four observers.  Coroner Bogaert
   instinctively looked around the room to see if there were any conceivable
   instrument or arrangement of piled-up furniture which could make it
   possible for those straggling marks to have been drawn by human agency. 
   Finding nothing of the sort, he resumed his curious and awesome upward
   glance.

   For beyond a doubt these inky smudges formed definite letters of the
   alphabet--letters coherently arranged in English words.  The doctor was
   the first to make them out clearly, and the others listened breathlessly
   as he recited the insane-sounding message so incredibly scrawled in a
   place no human hand could reach:

"SEE MY JOURNAL--IT GOT ME FIRST--I DIED--THEN I SAW I WAS IN IT--THE BLACKS ARE
       RIGHT--STRANGE POWERS IN NATURE--NOW I WILL DROWN WHAT IS LEFT--"

   Presently, amid the puzzled hush that followed, Doctor Van Keulen
   commenced reading aloud from the worn leather journal.

   The Lovecraft Library wishes to extend its gratitude to Kevin Park for
   transcribing this text. 
