The Curse of Yig

  by H. P. Lovecraft and Zealia Bishop

                                  Written 1928

   Published November 1929 in Weird Tales, Volume 14, Number 5, Pages 625-36.

   In 1925 I went into Oklahoma looking for snake lore, and I came out with a
   fear of snakes that will last me the rest of my life. I admit it is
   foolish, since there are natural explanations for everything I saw and
   heard, but it masters me none the less. If the old story had been all
   there was to it, I would not have been so badly shaken. My work as an
   American Indian ethnologist has hardened me to all kinds of extravagant
   legendry, and I know that simple white people can beat the redskins at
   their own game when it comes to fanciful inventions. But I can't forget
   what I saw with my own eyes at the insane asylum in Guthrie.

   I called at that asylum because a few of the oldest settlers told me I
   would find something important there. Neither Indians nor white men would
   discuss the snake-god legends I had come to trace. The oil-boom newcomers,
   of course, knew nothing of such matters, and the red men and old pioneers
   were plainly frightened when I spoke of them. Not more than six or seven
   people mentioned the asylum, and those who did were careful to talk in
   whispers. But the whisperers said that Dr. McNeill could shew me a very
   terrible relic and tell me all I wanted to know. He could explain why Yig,
   the half-human father of serpents, is a shunned and feared object in
   central Oklahoma, and why old settlers shiver at the secret Indian orgies
   which make the autumn days and nights hideous with the ceaseless beating
   of tom-toms in lonely places.

   It was with the scent of a hound on the trail that I went to Guthrie, for
   I had spent many years collecting data on the evolution of serpent-worship
   among the Indians. I had always felt, from well-defined undertones of
   legend and archaeology, that great Quetzalcoatl-benign snake-god of the
   Mexicans-had had an older and darker prototype; and during recent months I
   had well-nigh proved it in a series of researches stretching from
   Guatemala to the Oklahoma plains. But everything was tantalising and
   incomplete, for above the border the cult of the snake was hedged about by
   fear and furtiveness.

   Now it appeared that a new and copious source of data was about to dawn,
   and I sought the head of the asylum with an eagerness I did not try to
   cloak. Dr. McNeill was a small, clean-shaven man of somewhat advanced
   years, and I saw at once from his speech and manner that he was a scholar
   of no mean attainments in many branches outside his profession. Grave and
   doubtful when I first made known my errand, his face grew thoughtful as he
   carefully scanned my credentials and the letter of introduction which a
   kindly old ex-Indian agent had given me.

   "So you've been studying the Yig legend, eh?" he reflected sententiously.
   "I know that many of our Oklahoma ethnologists have tried to connect it
   with Quetzalcoatl, but I don't think any of them have traced the
   intermediate steps so well. You've done remarkable work for a man as young
   as you seem to be, and you certainly deserve all the data we can give.

   "I don't suppose old Major Moore or any of the others told you what it is
   I have here. They don't like to talk about it, and neither do I. It is
   very tragic and very horrible, but that is all. I refuse to consider it
   anything supernatural. There's a story about it that I'll tell you after
   you see it-a devilish sad story, but one that I won't call magic. It
   merely shews the potency that belief has over some people. I'll admit
   there are times when I feel a shiver that's more than physical, but in
   daylight I set all that down to nerves. I'm not a young fellow any more,
   alas!

   "To come to the point, the thing I have is what you might call a victim of
   Yig's curse-a physically living victim. We don't let the bulk of the
   nurses see it, although most of them know it's here. There are just two
   steady old chaps whom I let feed it and clean out its quarters-used to be
   three, but good old Stevens passed on a few years ago. I suppose I'll have
   to break in a new group pretty soon; for the thing doesn't seem to age or
   change much, and we old boys can't last forever. Maybe the ethics of the
   near future will let us give it a merciful release, but it's hard to tell.

   "Did you see that single ground-glass basement window over in the east
   wing when you came up the drive? That's where it is. I'll take you there
   myself now. You needn't make any comment. Just look through the moveable
   panel in the door and thank God the light isn't any stronger. Then I'll
   tell you the story-or as much as I've been able to piece together."

   We walked downstairs very quietly, and did not talk as we threaded the
   corridors of the seemingly deserted basement. Dr. McNeill unlocked a
   grey-painted steel door, but it was only a bulkhead leading to a further
   stretch of hallway. At length he paused before a door marked B 116, opened
   a small observation panel which he could use only by standing on tiptoe,
   and pounded several times upon the painted metal, as if to arouse the
   occupant, whatever it might be.

   A faint stench came from the aperture as the doctor unclosed it, and I
   fancied his pounding elicited a kind of low, hissing response. Finally he
   motioned me to replace him at the peep-hole, and I did so with a causeless
   and increasing tremor. The barred, ground-glass window, close to the earth
   outside, admitted only a feeble and uncertain pallor; and I had to look
   into the malodorous den for several seconds before I could see what was
   crawling and wriggling about on the straw-covered floor, emitting every
   now and then a weak and vacuous hiss. Then the shadowed outlines began to
   take shape, and I perceived that the squirming entity bore some remote
   resemblance to a human form laid flat on its belly. I clutched at the
   door-handle for support as I tried to keep from fainting.

   The moving object was almost of human size, and entirely devoid of
   clothing. It was absolutely hairless, and its tawny-looking back seemed
   subtly squamous in the dim, ghoulish light. Around the shoulders it was
   rather speckled and brownish, and the head was very curiously flat. As it
   looked up to hiss at me I saw that the beady little black eyes were
   damnably anthropoid, but I could not bear to study them long. They
   fastened themselves on me with a horrible persistence, so that I closed
   the panel gaspingly and left the creature to wriggle about unseen in its
   matted straw and spectral twilight. I must have reeled a bit, for I saw
   that the doctor was gently holding my arm as he guided me away. I was
   stuttering over and over again: "B-but for God's sake, what is it?"

   Dr. McNeill told me the story in his private office as I sprawled opposite
   him in an easy-chair. The gold and crimson of late afternoon changed to
   the violet of early dusk, but still I sat awed and motionless. I resented
   every ring of the telephone and every whir of the buzzer, and I could have
   cursed the nurses and internes whose knocks now and then summoned the
   doctor briefly to the outer office. Night came, and I was glad my host
   switched on all the lights. Scientist though I was, my zeal for research
   was half forgotten amidst such breathless ecstasies of fright as a small
   boy might feel when whispered witch-tales go the rounds of the
   chimney-corner.

   It seems that Yig, the snake-god of the central plains tribes-presumably
   the primal source of the more southerly Quetzalcoatl or Kukulcan-was an
   odd, half-anthropomorphic devil of highly arbitrary and capricious nature.
   He was not wholly evil, and was usually quite well-disposed toward those
   who gave proper respect to him and his children, the serpents; but in the
   autumn he became abnormally ravenous, and had to be driven away by means
   of suitable rites. That was why the tom-toms in the Pawnee, Wichita, and
   Caddo country pounded ceaselessly week in and week out in August,
   September, and October; and why the medicine-men made strange noises with
   rattles and whistles curiously like those of the Aztecs and Mayas.

   Yig's chief trait was a relentless devotion to his children-a devotion so
   great that the redskins almost feared to protect themselves from the
   venomous rattlesnakes which thronged the region. Frightful clandestine
   tales hinted of his vengeance upon mortals who flouted him or wreaked harm
   upon his wriggling progeny; his chosen method being to turn his victim,
   after suitable tortures, to a spotted snake.

   In the old days of the Indian Territory, the doctor went on, there was not
   quite so much secrecy about Yig. The plains tribes, less cautious than the
   desert nomads and Pueblos, talked quite freely of their legends and autumn
   ceremonies with the first Indian agents, and let considerable of the lore
   spread out through the neighbouring regions of white settlement. The great
   fear came in the land-rush days of '89, when some extraordinary incidents
   had been rumoured, and the rumours sustained, by what seemed to be
   hideously tangible proofs. Indians said that the new white men did not
   know how to get on with Yig, and afterward the settlers came to take that
   theory at face value. Now no old-timer in middle Oklahoma, white or red,
   could be induced to breathe a word about the snake-god except in vague
   hints. Yet after all, the doctor added with almost needless emphasis, the
   only truly authenticated horror had been a thing of pitiful tragedy rather
   than of bewitchment. It was all very material and cruel-even that last
   phase which ha caused so much dispute.

   Dr. McNeill paused and cleared his throat before getting down to his
   special story, and I felt a tingling sensation as when a theatre curtain
   rises. The thing had begun when Walker Davis and his wife Audrey left
   Arkansas to settle in the newly opened public lands in the spring of 1889,
   and the end had come in the country of the Wichitas-north of the Wichita
   River, in what is at present Caddo County. There is a small village called
   Binger there now, and the railway goes through; but otherwise the place is
   less changed than other parts of Oklahoma. It is still a section of farms
   and ranches-quite productive in these days-since the great oil-fields do
   not come very close.

   Walker and Audrey had come from Franklin County in the Ozarks with a
   canvas-topped wagon, two mules, an ancient and useless dog called "Wolf",
   and all their household goods. They were typical hill-folk, youngish and
   perhaps a little more ambitious than most, and looked forward to a life of
   better returns for their a hard work than they had had in Arkansas. Both
   were lean, raw-boned specimens; the man tall, sandy, and grey-eyed, and
   the woman short and rather dark, with a black straightness of hair
   suggesting a slight Indian admixture.

   In general, there was very little of distinction about them, and but for
   one thing their annals might not have differed from those of thousands of
   other pioneers who flocked into the new country at that time. That thing
   was Walker's almost epileptic fear of snakes, which some laid to prenatal
   causes, and some said came from a dark prophecy about his end with which
   an old Indian squaw had tried to scare him when he was small. Whatever the
   cause, the effect was marked indeed; for despite his strong general
   courage the very mention of a snake would cause him to grow faint and
   pale, while the sight of even a tiny specimen would produce a shock
   sometimes bordering on a convulsion seizure.

   The Davises started out early in the year, in the hope of being on their
   new land for the spring ploughing. Travel was slow; for the roads were bad
   in Arkansas, while in the Territory there were great stretches of rolling
   hills and red, sandy barrens without any roads whatever. As the terrain
   grew flatter, the change from their native mountains depressed them more,
   perhaps, than they realised; but they found the people at the Indian
   agencies very affable, while most of the settled Indians seemed friendly
   and civil. Now and then they encountered a fellow-pioneer, with whom crude
   pleasantries and expressions of amiable rivalry were generally exchanged.

   Owing to the season, there were not many snakes in evidence, so Walker did
   not suffer from his special temperamental weakness. In the earlier stages
   of the journey, too, there were no Indian snake-legends to trouble him;
   for the transplanted tribes from the southeast do not share the wilder
   beliefs of their western neighbours. As fate would have it, it was a white
   man at Okmulgee in the Creek country who gave the Davises the first hint
   of Yig beliefs; a hint which had a curiously fascinating effect on Walker,
   and caused him to ask questions very freely after that.

   Before long Walker's fascination had developed into a bad case of fright.
   He took the most extraordinary precautions at each of the nightly camps,
   always clearing away whatever vegetation he found, and avoiding stony
   places whenever he could. Every clump of stunted bushes and every cleft in
   the great, slab-like rocks seemed to him now to hide malevolent serpents,
   while every human figure not obviously part of a settlement or emigrant
   train seemed to him a potential snake-god till nearness had proved the
   contrary. Fortunately no troublesome encounters came at this stage to
   shake his nerves still further.

   As they approached the Kickapoo country they found it harder and harder to
   avoid camping near rocks. Finally it was no longer possible, and poor
   Walker was reduced to the puerile expedient of droning some of the rustic
   anti-snake charms he had learned in his boyhood. Two or three times a
   snake was really glimpsed, and these sights did not help the sufferer in
   his efforts to preserve composure.

   On the twenty-second evening of the journey a savage wind made it
   imperative, for the sake of the mules, to camp in as sheltered a spot as
   possible; and Audrey persuaded her husband to take advantage of a cliff
   which rose uncommonly high above the dried bed of a former tributary of
   the Canadian River. He did not like the rocky cast of the place, but
   allowed himself to be overruled this once; leading the animals sullenly
   toward the protecting slope, which the nature of the ground would not
   allow the wagon to approach.

   Audrey, examining the rocks near the wagon, meanwhile noticed a singular
   sniffing on the part of the feeble old dog. Seizing a rifle, she followed
   his lead, and presently thanked her stars that she had forestalled Walker
   in her discovery. For there, snugly nested in the gap between two
   boulders, was a sight it would have done him no good to see. Visible only
   as one convoluted expanse, but perhaps comprising as many as three or four
   separate units, was a mass of lazy wriggling which could not be other than
   a brood of new-born rattlesnakes.

   Anxious to save Walker from a trying shock, Audrey did not hesitate to
   act, but took the gun firmly by the barrel and brought the butt down again
   and again upon the writhing objects. Her own sense of loathing was great,
   but it did not amount to a real fear. Finally she saw that her task was
   done, and turned to cleanse the improvised bludgeon in the red sand and
   dry, dead grass near by. She must, she reflected, cover the nest up before
   Walker got back from tethering the mules. Old Wolf, tottering relic of
   mixed shepherd and coyote ancestry that he was, had vanished, and she
   feared he had gone to fetch his master.

   Footsteps at that instant proved her fear well founded. A second more, and
   Walker had seen everything. Audrey made a move to catch him if he should
   faint, but he did no more than sway. Then the look of pure fright on his
   bloodless face turned slowly to something like mingled awe and anger, and
   he began to upbraid his wife in trembling tones.

   "Gawd's sake, Aud, but why'd ye go for to do that? Hain't ye heerd all the
   things they've been tellin' about this snake-devil Yig? Ye'd ought to a
   told me, and we'd a moved on. Don't ye know they's a devil-god what gets
   even if ye hurts his children? What for d'ye think the Injuns all dances
   and beats their drums in the fall about? This land's under a curse, I tell
   ye-nigh every soul we've a-talked to sence we come in's said the same. Yig
   rules here, an' he comes out every fall for to git his victims and turn
   'em into snakes. Why, Aud, they won't none of them Injuns acrost the
   Canayjin kill a snake for love nor money!

   "Gawd knows what ye done to yourself, gal, a-stompin' out a hull brood o'
   Yig's chillen. He'll git ye, sure, sooner or later, unlessen I kin buy a
   charm offen some o' the Injun medicine-men. He'll git ye, Aud, as sure's
   they's a Gawd in heaven-he'll come outa the night and turn ye into a
   crawlin' spotted snake!"

   All the rest of the journey Walker kept up the frightened reproofs and
   prophecies. They crossed the Canadian near Newcastle, and soon afterward
   met with the first of the real plains Indians they had seen-a party of
   blanketed Wichitas, whose leader talked freely under the spell of the
   whiskey offered him, and taught poor Walker a long-winded protective charm
   against Yig in exchange for a quart bottle of the same inspiring fluid. By
   the end of the week the chosen site in the Wichita country was reached,
   and the Davises made haste to trace their boundaries and perform the
   spring ploughing before even beginning the construction of a cabin.

   The region was flat, drearily windy, and sparse of natural vegetation, but
   promised great fertility under cultivation. Occasional outcroppings of
   granite diversified a soil of decomposed red sandstone, and here and there
   a great flat rock would stretch along the surface of the ground like a
   man-made floor. There seemed to be a very few snakes, or possible dens for
   them; so Audrey at last persuaded Walker to build the one-room cabin over
   a vast, smooth slab of exposed stone. With such a flooring and with a
   good-sized fireplace the wettest weather might be defied-though it soon
   became evident that dampness was no salient quality of the district. Logs
   were hauled in the wagon from the nearest belt of woods, many miles toward
   the Wichita Mountains.

   Walker built his wide-chimneyed cabin and crude barn with the aid of some
   of the other settlers, though the nearest one was over a mile away. In
   turn, he helped his helpers at similar house-raisings, so that many ties
   of friendship sprang up between the new neighbours. There was no town
   worthy the name nearer than El Reno, on the railway thirty miles or more
   to the northeast; and before many weeks had passed, the people of the
   section had become very cohesive despite the wideness of their scattering.
   The Indians, a few of whom had begun to settle down on ranches, were for
   the most part harmless, though somewhat quarrelsome when fired by the
   liquid stimulation which found its way to them despite all government
   bans.

   Of all the neighbours the Davises found Joe and Sally Compton, who
   likewise hailed from Arkansas, the most helpful and congenial. Sally is
   still alive, known now as Grandma Compton; and her son Clyde, then an
   infant in arms, has become one of the leading men of the state. Sally and
   Audrey used to visit each other often, for their cabins were only two
   miles apart; and in the long spring and summer afternoons they exchanged
   many a tale of old Arkansas and many a rumour about the new country.

   Sally was very sympathetic about Walker's weakness regarding snakes, but
   perhaps did more to aggravate than cure the parallel nervousness which
   Audrey was acquiring through his incessant praying and prophesying about
   the curse of Yig. She was uncommonly full of gruesome snake stories, and
   produced a direfully strong impression with her acknowledged
   masterpiece-the tale of a man in Scott County who had been bitten by a
   whole horde of rattlers at once, and had swelled so monstrously from
   poison that his body had finally burst with a pop. Needless to say, Audrey
   did not repeat this anecdote to her husband, and she implored the Comptons
   to beware of starting it on the rounds of the countryside. It is to Joe's
   and Sally's credit that they heeded this plea with the utmost fidelity.

   Walker did his corn-planting early, and in midsummer improved his time by
   harvesting a fair crop of the native grass of the region. With the help of
   Joe Compton he dug a well which gave a moderate supply of very good water,
   though he planned to sink an artesian later on. He did not run into many
   serious snake scares, and made his land as inhospitable as possible for
   wriggling visitors. Every now and then he rode over to the cluster of
   thatched, conical huts which formed the main village of the Wichitas, and
   talked long with the old men and shamans about the snake-god and how to
   nullify his wrath. Charms were always ready in exchange for whiskey, but
   much of the information he got was far from reassuring.

   Yig was a great god. He was bad medicine. He did not forget things. In the
   autumn his children were hungry and wild, and Yig was hungry and wild,
   too. All the tribes made medicine against Yig when the corn harvest came.
   They gave him some corn, and danced in proper regalia to the sound of
   whistle, rattle, and drum. They kept the drums pounding to drive Yig away,
   and called down the aid of Tirawa, whose children men are, even as the
   snakes are Yig's children. It was bad that the squaw of Davis killed the
   children of Yig. Let Davis say the charms many times when the corn harvest
   comes. Yig is Yig. Yig is a great god.

   By the time the corn harvest did come, Walker had succeeded in getting his
   wife into a deplorably jumpy state. His prayers and borrowed incantations
   came to be a nuisance; and when the autumn rites of the Indians began,
   there was always a distant wind-borne pounding of tom-toms to lend an
   added background of the sinister. It was maddening to have the muffled
   clatter always stealing over the wide red plains. Why would it never stop?
   Day and night, week on week, it was always going in exhaustless relays, as
   persistently as the red dusty winds that carried it. Audrey loathed it
   more than her husband did, for he saw in it a compensating element of
   protection. It was with this sense of a mighty, intangible bulwark against
   evil that he got in his corn crop and prepared cabin and stable for the
   coming winter.

   The autumn was abnormally warm, and except for their primitive cookery the
   Davises found scant use for the stone fireplace Walker had built with such
   care. Something in the unnaturalness of the hot dust-clouds preyed on the
   nerves of all the settlers, but most of all on Audrey's and Walker's. The
   notions of a hovering snake-curse and the weird, endless rhythm of the
   distant Indian drums formed a bad combination which any added element of
   the bizarre went far to render utterly unendurable.

   Notwithstanding this strain, several festive gatherings were held at one
   or another of the cabins after the crops were reaped; keeping naively
   alive in modernity those curious rites of the harvest-home which are as
   old as human agriculture itself. Lafayette Smith, who came from southern
   Missouri and had a cabin about three miles east of Walker's, was a very
   passable fiddler; and his tunes did much to make the celebrants forget the
   monotonous beating of the distant tom-toms. Then Hallowe'en drew near, and
   the settlers planned another frolic-this time, had they but known it, of a
   lineage older than even agriculture; the dread Witch-Sabbath of the primal
   pre-Aryans, kept alive through ages in the midnight blackness of secret
   woods, and still hinting at vague terrors under its latter-day mask of
   comedy and lightness. Hallowe'en was to fall on a Thursday, and the
   neighbours agreed to gather for their first revel at the Davis cabin.

   It was on that thirty-first of October that the warm spell broke. The
   morning was grey and leaden, and by noon the incessant winds had changed
   from searingness to rawness. People shivered all the more because they
   were not prepared for the chill, and Walker Davis' old dog Wolf dragged
   himself wearily indoors to a place beside the hearth. But the distant
   drums still thumped on, nor were the white citizenry less inclined to
   pursue their chosen rites. As early as four in the afternoon the wagons
   began to arrive at Walker's cabin; and in the evening, after a memorable
   barbecue, Lafayette Smith's fiddle inspired a very fair-sized company to
   great feats of saltatory grotesqueness in the one good-sized but crowded
   room. The younger folk indulged in the amiable inanities proper to the
   season, and now and then old Wolf would howl with doleful and
   spine-tickling ominousness at some especially spectral strain from
   Lafayette's squeaky violin-a device he had never heard before. Mostly,
   though, this battered veteran slept through the merriment; for he was past
   the age of active interests and lived largely in his dreams. Tom and
   Jennie Rigby had brought their collie Zeke along, but the canines did not
   fraternise. Zeke seemed strangely uneasy over something, and nosed around
   curiously all the evening.

   Audrey and Walker made a fine couple on the floor, and Grandma Compton
   still likes to recall her impression of their dancing that night. Their
   worries seemed forgotten for the nonce, and Walker was shaved and trimmed
   into a surprising degree of spruceness. By ten o'clock all hands were
   healthily tired, and the guests began to depart family by family with many
   handshakings and bluff assurances of what a fine time everybody had had.
   Tom ands Jennie thought Zeke's eerie howls as he followed them to their
   wagon were marks of regret at having to go home; though Audrey said it
   must be the far-away tom-toms which annoyed him, for the distant thumping
   was surely ghastly enough after the merriment within.

   The night was bitterly cold, and for the first time Walker put a great log
   in the fireplace and banked it with ashes to keep it smouldering till
   morning. Old Wolf dragged himself within the ruddy glow and lapsed into
   his customary coma. Audrey and Walker, too tired to think of charms or
   curses, tumbled into the rough pine bed and were asleep before the cheap
   alarm-clock on the mantel had ticked out three minutes. And from far away,
   the rhythmic pounding of those hellish tom-toms still pulsed on the chill
   night-wind.

   Dr. McNeill paused here and removed his glasses, as if a blurring of the
   objective world might make the reminiscent vision clearer.

   "You'll soon appreciate," he said, "that I had a great deal of difficulty
   in piecing out all that happened after the guests left. There were times,
   though-at first-when I was able to make a try at it." After a moment of
   silence he went on with the tale.

   Audrey had terrible dreams of Yig, who appeared to her in the guise of
   Satan as depicted in cheap engravings she had seen. It was, indeed, from
   an absolute ecstasy of nightmare that she started suddenly awake to find
   Walker already conscious and sitting up in bed. He seemed to be listening
   intently to something, and silenced her with a whisper when she began to
   ask what had roused him.

   "Hark, Aud!" he breathed. "Don't ye hear somethin' a-singin' and buzzin'
   and rustlin'? D'ye reckon it's the fall crickets?"

   Certainly, there was distinctly audible within the cabin such a sound as
   he had described. Audrey tried to analyse it, and was impressed with some
   element at once horrible and familiar, which hovered just outside the rim
   of her memory. And beyond it all, waking a hideous thought, the monotonous
   beating of the distant tom-toms came incessantly across the black plains
   on which a cloudy half-moon had set.

   "Walker-s'pose it's-the-the-curse o' Yig?"

   She could feel him tremble.

   "No, gal, I don't reckon he comes that away. He's shapen like a man,
   except ye look at him clost. That's what Chief Grey Eagle says. This
   here's some varmints come in outen the cold-not crickets, I calc'late, but
   summat like 'em. I'd orter git up and stomp 'em out afore they make much
   headway or git at the cupboard."

   He rose, felt for the lantern that hung within easy reach, and rattled the
   tin match-box nailed to the wall beside it. Audrey sat up in bed and
   watched the flare of the match grow into the steady glow of the lantern.
   Then, as their eyes began to take in the whole of the room, the crude
   rafters shook with the frenzy of their simultaneous shriek. For the flat,
   rocky floor, revealed in the new-born illumination, was one seething,
   brown-speckled mass of wriggling rattlesnakes, slithering toward the fire,
   and even now turning their loathsome heads to menace the fright-blasted
   lantern-bearer.

   It was only for an instant that Audrey saw the things. The reptiles were
   of every size, of uncountable numbers, and apparently of several
   varieties; and even as she looked, two or three of them reared their heads
   as if to strike at Walker. She did not faint-it was Walker's crash to the
   floor that extinguished the lantern and plunged her into blackness. He had
   not screamed a second time-fright had paralysed him, and he fell as if
   shot by a silent arrow from no mortal's bow. To Audrey the entire world
   seemed to whirl about fantastically, mingling with the nightmare from
   which she had started.

   Voluntary motion of any sort was impossible, for will and the sense of
   reality had left her. She fell back inertly on her pillow, hoping that she
   would wake soon. No actual sense of what had happened penetrated her mind
   for some time. Then, little by little, the suspicion that she was really
   awake began to dawn on her; and she was convulsed with a mounting blend of
   panic and grief which made her long to shriek out despite the inhibiting
   spell which kept her mute.

   Walker was gone, and she had not been able to help him. He had died of
   snakes, just as the old witch-woman had predicted when he was a little
   boy. Poor Wolf had not been able to help, either-probably he had not even
   awaked from his senile stupor. And now the crawling things must be coming
   for her, writhing closer and closer every moment in the dark, perhaps even
   now twining slipperily about the bedposts and oozing up over the coarse
   woollen blankets. Unconsciously she crept under the clothes and trembled.

   It must be the curse of Yig. He had sent his monstrous children on
   All-Hallows' Night, and they had taken Walker first. Why was that-wasn't
   he innocent enough? Why not come straight for her-hadn't she killed those
   little rattlers alone? Then she thought of the curse's form as told by the
   Indians. She wouldn't be killed-just turned to a spotted snake. Ugh! So
   she would be like those things she had glimpsed on the floor-those things
   which Yig had sent to get her and enroll her among their number! She tried
   to mumble a charm that Walker had taught her, but found she could not
   utter a single sound.

   The noisy ticking of the alarm-clock sounded above the maddening beat of
   the distant tom-toms. The snakes were taking a long time-did they mean to
   delay on purpose to play on her nerves? Every now and then she thought she
   felt a steady, insidious pressure on the bedclothes, but each time it
   turned out to be only the automatic twitchings of her overwrought nerves.
   The clock ticked on in the dark, and a change came slowly over her
   thoughts.

   Those snakes couldn't have taken so long! They couldn't be Yig's
   messengers after all, but just natural rattlers that were nested below the
   rock and had been drawn there by the fire. They weren't coming for her,
   perhaps-perhaps they had sated themselves on poor Walker. Where were they
   now? Gone? Coiled by the fire? Still crawling over the prone corpse of
   their victim? The clock ticked, and the distant drums throbbed on.

   At the thought of her husband's body lying there in the pitch blackness a
   thrill of purely physical horror passed over Audrey. That story of Sally
   Compton's about the man back in Scott County! He, too, had been bitten by
   a whole bunch of rattlesnakes, and what had happened to him? The poison
   had rotted the flesh and swelled the whole corpse, and in the end the
   bloated thing had burst horribly-burst horribly with a detestable popping
   noise. Was that what was happening to Walker down there on the rock floor?
   Instinctively she felt she had begun to listen for something too terrible
   even to name to herself.

   The clock ticked on, keeping a kind of mocking, sardonic time with the
   far-off drumming that the night-wind brought. She wished it were a
   striking clock, so that she could know how long this eldritch vigil must
   last. She cursed the toughness of fibre that kept her from fainting, and
   wondered what sort of relief the dawn could bring, after all. Probably
   neighbours would pass-no doubt somebody would call-would they find her
   still sane? Was she still sane now?

   Morbidly listening, Audrey all at once became aware of something which she
   had to verify with every effort of her will before she could believe it;
   and which, once verified, she did not know whether to welcome or dread.
   The distant beating of the Indian tom-toms had ceased. They had always
   maddened her-but had not Walker regarded them as a bulwark against
   nameless evil from outside the universe? What were some of those things he
   had repeated to her in whispers after talking with Grey Eagle and the
   Wichita medicine-men?

   She did not relish this new and sudden silence, after all! There was
   something sinister about it. The loud-ticking clock seemed abnormal in its
   new loneliness. Capable at last of conscious motion, she shook the covers
   from her face and looked into the darkness toward the window. It must have
   cleared after the moon set, for she saw the square aperture distinctly
   against the background of stars.

   Then without warning came that shocking, unutterable sound-ugh!-that dull,
   putrid pop of cleft skin and escaping poison in the dark. God!-Sally's
   story-that obscene stench, and this gnawing, clawing silence! It was too
   much. The bonds of muteness snapped, and the black night waxed reverberant
   with Audrey's screams of stark, unbridled frenzy.

   Consciousness did not pass away with the shock. How merciful if only it
   had! Amidst the echoes of her shrieking Audrey still saw the
   star-sprinkled square of window ahead, and heard the doom-boding ticking
   of that frightful clock. Did she hear another sound? Was that square
   window still a perfect square? She was in no condition to weigh the
   evidence of her senses or distinguish between fact and hallucination.

   No-that window was not a perfect square. Something had encroached on the
   lower edge. Nor was the ticking of the clock the only sound in the room.
   There was, beyond dispute, a heavy breathing neither her own nor poor
   Wolf's. Wolf slept very silently, and his wakeful wheezing was
   unmistakable. Then Audrey saw against the stars the black, daemoniac
   silhouette of something anthropoid-the undulant bulk of a gigantic head
   and shoulders fumbling slowly toward her.

   "Y'aaaah! Y'aaaah! Go away! Go away! Go away, snake-devil! Go 'way, Yig! I
   didn't mean to kill 'em-I was feared he'd be scairt of 'em. Don't, Yig,
   don't! I didn't go for to hurt yore chillen-don't come nigh me-don't
   change me into no spotted snake!"

   But the half-formless head and shoulders only lurched onward toward the
   bed, very silently.

   Everything snapped at once inside Audrey's head, and in a second she had
   turned from a cowering child to a raging madwoman. She knew where the axe
   was-hung against the wall on those pegs near the lantern. It was within
   easy reach, and she could find it in the dark. Before she was conscious of
   anything further it was in her hands, and she was creeping toward the foot
   of the bed-toward the monstrous head and shoulders that every moment
   groped their way nearer. Had there been any light, the look on her face
   would not have been pleasant to see.

   "Take that, you! And that, and that, and that!"

   She was laughing shrilly now, and her cackles mounted higher as she saw
   that the starlight beyond the window was yielding to the dim prophetic
   pallor of coming dawn.

   Dr. McNeill wiped the perspiration from his forehead and put on his
   glasses again. I waited for him to resume, and as he kept silent I spoke
   softly.

   "She lived? She was found? Was it ever explained?"

   The doctor cleared his throat.

   "Yes-she lived, in a way. And it was explained. I told you there was no
   bewitchment-only cruel, pitiful, material horror."

   It was Sally Compton who had made the discovery. She had ridden over to
   the Davis cabin the next afternoon to talk over the party with Audrey, and
   had seen no smoke from the chimney. That was queer. It had turned very
   warm again, yet Audrey was usually cooking something at that hour. The
   mules were making hungry-sounding noises in the barn, and there was no
   sign of old Wolf sunning himself in the accustomed spot by the door.

   Altogether, Sally did not like the look of the place, so was very timid
   and hesitant as she dismounted and knocked. She got no answer but waited
   some time before trying the crude door of split logs. The lock, it
   appeared, was unfastened; and she slowly pushed her way in. Then,
   perceiving what was there, she reeled back, gasped, and clung to the jamb
   to preserve her balance.

   A terrible odour had welled out as she opened the door, but that was not
   what had stunned her. It was what she had seen. For within that shadowy
   cabin monstrous things had happened and three shocking objects remained on
   the floor to awe and baffle the beholder.

   Near the burned-out fireplace was the great dog-purple decay on the skin
   left bare by mange and old age, and the whole carcass burst by the puffing
   effect of rattlesnake poison. It must have been bitten by a veritable
   legion of the reptiles.

   To the right of the door was the axe-hacked remnant of what had been a
   man-clad in a nightshirt, and with the shattered bulk of a lantern
   clenched in one hand. He was totally free from any sign of snake-bite.
   Near him lay the ensanguined axe, carelessly discarded.

   And wriggling flat on the floor was a loathsome, vacant-eyed thing that
   had been a woman, but was now only a mute mad caricature. All that this
   thing could do was to hiss, and hiss, and hiss.

   Both the doctor and I were brushing cold drops from our foreheads by this
   time. He poured something from a flask on his desk, took a nip, and handed
   another glass to me. I could only suggest tremulously and stupidly:

   "So Walker had only fainted that first time-the screams roused him, and
   the axe did the rest?"

   "Yes." Dr. McNeill's voice was low. "But he met his death from snakes just
   the same. It was his fear working in two ways-it made him faint, and it
   made him fill his wife with the wild stories that caused her to strike out
   when she thought she saw the snake-devil."

   I thought for a moment.

   "And Audrey-wasn't it queer how the curse of Yig seemed to work itself out
   on her? I suppose the impression of hissing snakes had been fairly ground
   into her."

   "Yes. There were lucid spells at first, but they got to be fewer and
   fewer. Her hair came white at the roots as it grew, and later began to
   fall out. The skin grew blotchy, and when she died-"

   I interrupted with a start.

   "Died? Then what was that-that thing downstairs?"

   McNeill spoke gravely.

   "That is what was born to her three-quarters of a year afterward. There
   were three more of them-two were even worse-but this is the only one that
   lived."

   The Lovecraft Library wishes to extend its gratitude to Jim Java for
   transcribing this text. 
